Arrest Search and Seizure Relating to Search Warrants 
The Basic Criteria for Search Warrants
 Search Warrant Definition
 
 a judge’s written order authorizing a law enforcement officer to 
conduct a search of a specified place and to seize evidence 

 Black’s Law Dictionary, 7th Ed., 1999, West Group, Inc.
 Instructor Intro 
Teach TCOLE AS&S curriculum related to Search Warrants 
1
 2
 Art. 18.01. SEARCH WARRANT. (a) A "search warrant" is a written order, issued by a 
magistrate and directed to a peace officer, commanding him to search for any 
property or thing and to seize the same and bring it before such magistrate or 
commanding him to search for and photograph a child and to deliver to the 
magistrate any of the film exposed pursuant to the order. 
(b) No search warrant shall issue for any purpose in this state unless sufficient facts 
are first presented to satisfy the issuing magistrate that probable cause does in fact 
exist for its issuance. A sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts establishing 
probable cause shall be filed in every instance in which a search warrant is requested. 
Except as otherwise provided by this code, the affidavit becomes public information 
when the search warrant for which the affidavit was presented is executed, and the 
magistrate's clerk shall make a copy of the affidavit available for public inspection in 
the clerk's office during normal business hours. 
(c) A search warrant may not be issued under Article 18.02(a)(10) unless the sworn 
affidavit required by Subsection (b) sets forth sufficient facts to establish probable 
cause: (1) that a specific offense has been committed, (2) that the specifically 
described property or items that are to be searched for or seized constitute evidence 
of that offense or evidence that a particular person committed that offense, and (3) 
that the property or items constituting evidence to be searched for or seized are 
located at or on the particular person, place, or thing to be searched. Except as 
provided by Subsections (d), (i), and (j), only a judge of a municipal court of record or 
a county court who is an attorney licensed by the State of Texas, a statutory county 
court judge, a district court judge, a judge of the Court of Criminal Appeals, including 
the presiding judge, a justice of the Supreme Court of Texas, including the chief 
justice, or a magistrate with jurisdiction over criminal cases serving a district court 
may issue warrants under Article 18.02(a)(10). 
(d) Only the specifically described property or items set forth in a search warrant 
issued under Article 18.02(a)(10) or property, items or contraband enumerated in 
Article 18.02(a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), or (12) may be seized. A 
subsequent search warrant may be issued pursuant to Article 18.02(a)(10) to search 
the same person, place, or thing subjected to a prior search under Article 18.02(a)(10) 
only if the subsequent search warrant is issued by a judge of a statutory county court, 
a district court, a court of appeals, the court of criminal appeals, or the supreme 
court. 
(e) A search warrant may not be issued under Article 18.02(a)(10) to search for and 
seize property or items that are not described in Article 18.02(a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), 
(6), (7), (8), or (9) and that are located in an office of a newspaper, news magazine, 
television station, or radio station, and in no event may property or items not 
described in Article 18.02(a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), or (9) be legally seized in 
any search pursuant to a search warrant of an office of a newspaper, news magazine, 
television station, or radio station. 
CCP 18.01 Continued 
Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
 
 Shall not be issued w/o sufficient facts presented to a magistrate with probable 
cause that the facts exist 

 Sworn affidavits explaining the facts that establishing probable cause shall be filed 
for all search warrants.
 3
 (f) A search warrant may not be issued pursuant to Article 18.021 of this code unless 
the sworn affidavit required by Subsection (b) of this article sets forth sufficient facts 
to establish probable cause: 
(1) that a specific offense has been committed; 
(2) that a specifically described person has been a victim of the offense; 
(3) that evidence of the offense or evidence that a particular person committed the 
offense can be detected by photographic means; and 
(4) that the person to be searched for and photographed is located at the particular 
place to be searched. 
(g) A search warrant may not be issued under Article 18.02(a)(12) unless the sworn 
affidavit required by Subsection (b) of this article sets forth sufficient facts to 
establish probable cause that a specific felony offense has been committed and that 
the specifically described property or items that are to be searched for or seized 
constitute contraband as defined in Article 59.01 of this code and are located at or on 
the particular person, place, or thing to be searched. 
(h) Except as provided by Subsection (i) of this article, a warrant under Article 
18.02(a)(12) may only be issued by: 
(1) a judge of a municipal court of record who is an attorney licensed by the state; 
(2) a judge of a county court who is an attorney licensed by the state; or 
(3) a judge of a statutory county court, district court, the court of criminal appeals, or 
the supreme court. 
(i) In a county that does not have a municipal court of record with a courtroom 
located in that county and a judge who is an attorney licensed by the state, a county 
court judge who is an attorney licensed by the state, or a statutory county court 
judge, any magistrate may issue a search warrant under Article 18.02(a)(10) or (12). 
This subsection is not applicable to a subsequent search warrant under Article 
18.02(a)(10). 
(j) Any magistrate who is an attorney licensed by this state may issue a search 
warrant under Article 18.02(a)(10) to collect a blood specimen from a person who: 
(1) is arrested for an offense under Section 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.061, 
49.065, 49.07, or 49.08, Penal Code; and 
(2) refuses to submit to a breath or blood alcohol test. 
Review example of search warrants 
4
 5
 Review example of search warrants 
Review example of search warrants 
Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
 
 Magistrates may consider info via telephone or electronically: 
st
 
 Applicants or other testimony must 1
 be under oath
 
 Applicants that electronically attest must be noted in writing
 
 If testimony or other exhibits are considered, magistrates must:
 A.
 Record it verbatim electronically, via a court reporter, or in writing;
 6
 B.
 Transcribe recordings/notes, certify as accurate, & sign;
 C.
 Preserve the recordings, notes, any other written records or exhibits;
 7
 CCP 18.01 Continued 
(b-1)(1) For purposes of this article, a magistrate may consider information 
communicated by telephone or other reliable electronic means in determining 
whether to issue a search warrant. The magistrate may examine an applicant for a 
search warrant and any person on whose testimony the application is based. The 
applicant or other person must be placed under oath before the examination. 
(2) If an applicant for a search warrant attests to the contents of an affidavit 
submitted by reliable electronic means, the magistrate must acknowledge the 
attestation in writing on the affidavit. If the magistrate considers additional testimony 
or exhibits, the magistrate must: 
(A) ensure that the testimony is recorded verbatim by an electronic recording device, 
by a court reporter, or in writing; 
(B) ensure that any recording or reporter's notes are transcribed and that the 
transcription is certified as accurate and is preserved; 
(C) sign, certify the accuracy of, and preserve any other written record; and 
(D) ensure that the exhibits are preserved. 
(3) An applicant for a search warrant who submits information as authorized by this 
subsection must prepare a proposed duplicate original of the warrant and must read 
or otherwise transmit its contents verbatim to the magistrate. A magistrate must 
enter into an original search warrant the contents of a proposed duplicate original 
that are read to the magistrate. If the applicant transmits the contents by reliable 
electronic means, the transmission received by the magistrate may serve as the 
original search warrant. 
(4) The magistrate may modify a search warrant that is submitted as described by 
Subdivision (3). If the magistrate modifies the warrant, the magistrate must: 
(A) transmit the modified version to the applicant by reliable electronic means; or 
(B) file the modified original and direct the applicant to modify the proposed 
duplicate original accordingly. 
(5) A magistrate who issues a search warrant for which information is provided by 
telephone or reliable electronic means must: 
(A) sign the original documents; 
(B) enter the date and time of issuance on the warrant; and 
(C) transmit the warrant by reliable electronic means to the applicant or direct the 
applicant to sign the judge's name and enter the date and time on the duplicate 
original. 
(6) Evidence obtained pursuant to a search warrant for which information was 
provided in accordance with this subsection is not subject to suppression on the 
ground that issuing the warrant in compliance with this subsection was unreasonable 
under the circumstances, absent a finding of bad faith. 
CCP 18.01 Continued 
Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
 
 Applicants must prepare a proposed duplicate original of the warrant 
and read or otherwise transmit its contents verbatim to the magistrate  

 Magistrates must enter the contents into an original search warrant 

 If transmitted electronically, a transmission may serve as the original
 
 Magistrates may modify a submitted search warrant but must:
 o
 transmit the modified version to the applicant by electronic means; or
 o
 file the modified original & direct the applicant to modify their duplicate
 Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
 
 Magistrates who issue a search warrant for info provided by telephone 
or reliable electronic means must:
 
 sign the original documents;
 
 enter the date and time of issuance on the warrant; and
 
 transmit the warrant electronically to the applicant OR 

 direct him/her to sign the judge's name & enter the date & time on the duplicate 
original.
 
 Evidence obtained via a valid search warrant is not subject to 
suppression as unreasonable, absent a finding of bad faith.
 Grounds for issuance: CCP 18.02
 1.
 property acquired by theft or manner making it an offense 
2.
 property specially designed, made, or adapted for common illegal use
 3.
 arms & munitions kept or prepared for the purposes of insurrection or riot 
4.
 Prohibited weapons under the Penal Code 
5.
 gambling devices/equipment or altered gambling equipment/paraphernalia
 6.
 obscene materials kept or prepared for commercial distribution or exhibition, subject 
to the additional rules set forth by law; 
7.
 drug, cont. substance, immediate or chemical precursors, or cont. substance prop., 
apparatus, or paraphernalia: kept, prepared, or manufactured;
 8.
 any property the possession of which is prohibited by law 
9.
 implements or instruments used in the commission of a crime 
Grounds for issuance: CCP 18.02
 10.
 property or items, except the accused’s personal writings, constituting 
evidence of an offense or tends to show someone committed an offense 
11.
 Persons
 
 ;
 CCP 18.03: Search warrant may authorize arrest 
AKA: Evidentiary 
Search warrants
 
 If the facts presented establish probable cause that a person committed an 
offense: the search warrant may also order the arrest of such person. 
12.
 contraband subject to forfeiture under Chapter 59 of this code;
 (4) The magistrate may modify a search warrant that is submitted as described by 
Subdivision (3). If the magistrate modifies the warrant, the magistrate must: 
(A) transmit the modified version to the applicant by reliable electronic means; or 
(B) file the modified original and direct the applicant to modify the proposed 
duplicate original accordingly. 
8
 9
 10
 11
 (5) A magistrate who issues a search warrant for which information is provided by 
telephone or reliable electronic means must: 
(A) sign the original documents; 
(B) enter the date and time of issuance on the warrant; and 
(C) transmit the warrant by reliable electronic means to the applicant or direct the 
applicant to sign the judge's name and enter the date and time on the duplicate 
original. 
(6) Evidence obtained pursuant to a search warrant for which information was 
provided in accordance with this subsection is not subject to suppression on the 
ground that issuing the warrant in compliance with this subsection was unreasonable 
under the circumstances, absent a finding of bad faith. 
Art. 18.02. GROUNDS FOR ISSUANCE. (a) A search warrant may be issued to search 
for and seize: 
(1) property acquired by theft or in any other manner which makes its acquisition a 
penal offense; 
(2) property specially designed, made, or adapted for or commonly used in the 
commission of an offense; 
(3) arms and munitions kept or prepared for the purposes of insurrection or riot; 
(4) weapons prohibited by the Penal Code; 
(5) gambling devices or equipment, altered gambling equipment, or gambling 
paraphernalia; 
(6) obscene materials kept or prepared for commercial distribution or exhibition, 
subject to the additional rules set forth by law; 
(7) a drug, controlled substance, immediate precursor, chemical precursor, or other 
controlled substance property, including an apparatus or paraphernalia kept, 
prepared, or manufactured in violation of the laws of this state; 
(8) any property the possession of which is prohibited by law; 
(9) implements or instruments used in the commission of a crime; 
Art. 18.02. GROUNDS FOR ISSUANCE.  
(10) property or items, except the personal writings by the accused, constituting 
evidence of an offense or constituting evidence tending to show that a particular 
person committed an offense; 
(11) persons; 
(12) contraband subject to forfeiture under Chapter 59 of this code; 
Art. 18.03. SEARCH WARRANT MAY ORDER ARREST. If the facts presented to the 
magistrate under Article 18.02 of this chapter also establish the existence of probable 
cause that a person has committed some offense under the laws of this state, the 
search warrant may, in addition, order the arrest of such person 
Search warrants for items under #10 are called evidentiary search warrant 
Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
.02 (10)
 
 For items under (
 10
 ) affidavits must create probable cause:  
1)
 a specific offense has been committed, 
2)
 AKA: Evidentiary 
Search warrants
 specifically described property or items that are to be searched for or seized constitute evidence 
of the offense or someone committed it, &
 3)
 property or items constituting evidence to be searched for or seized will be located at or on the 
particular person, place, or thing 

 Search warrants may not be issued under (
 12
 ) unless the sworn affidavit sets forth 
facts to establish probable cause that
 
 a specific felony offense has been committed and 

 the specifically described property or items that are to be searched for or seized constitute 
contraband as defined in 59.01 (Asset Forfeiture Items)
 
 & will be located at or on the particular person, place, or thing
 12
 What if you see other evidence in plain view that 
is NOT listed in the Search Warrant?
 Search Warrants: CCP 18.01
.02 (10)
 10) 
13
 property or items, except the accused’s personal writings, constituting 
evidence of an offense or tends to show someone committed an offense 

 A search warrant may not be issued under (
 10
 ) to search for and seize property or 
items that are not described in (1
9) and are located in an office of a newspaper, 
news magazine, television station, or radio station, and 

 In no event may property or items not described in (1
9) be legally seized pursuant 
to a search warrant of an office of a newspaper, news magazine, television station, 
or radio station.
 Search Warrants: CCP 18.02
 
 Search warrants under 18.02 
(10 & 12
 ) may only be issued by:
 1)
 14
 judge of a municipal court of record or county court who are licensed attorneys, or judge of a 
statutory county court; or
 2)
 judge of district courts, court of criminal appeals, or supreme court; but
 3)
 When a county does not have judges listed in #1 then any magistrate may issue a search 
warrant under Article 18.02 (a)(10) or (12).  

 This does not apply to 
subsequent search
 
 warrants under (
 10
 ).
 They may be issued to search the same person, place, or thing from a prior search only if 

 issued by a judge of a district court, a court of appeals, the court of criminal appeals, or the 
supreme court.
 15
 Horton Vs California 
Does the application of the plain-view exception to the Fourth Amendment depend 
on officers’ discovery of incriminating evidence inadvertently? 
No. Officers’ discovery of incriminating evidence in plain view from a lawful vantage 
point is an exception to the warrant requirement even I the officers didn’t discover 
the evidence inadvertently. 
Plain-View – Lawful to be = Lawful to See 
10) property or items, except the accused’s personal writings, constituting evidence 
of an offense or tends to show someone committed an offense  
A search warrant may not be issued under (10) to search for and seize property or 
items that are not described in (1-9) and are located in an office of a newspaper, 
news magazine, television station, or radio station, and  
In no event may property or items not described in (1-9) be legally seized pursuant to 
a search warrant of an office of a newspaper, news magazine, television station, or 
radio station. 
Evidentiary and asset forfeiture search warrants allow only certain judges that can 
issue them 
Search warrants under 18.02 (10 & 12) may only be issued by: 
• judge of a municipal court of record or county court who are licensed 
attorneys, or judge of a statutory county court; or 
• judge of district courts, court of criminal appeals, or supreme court; 
but 
When a county does not have judges listed in #1 then any magistrate 
may issue a search warrant under Article 18.02 (a)(10) or (12).  ame person, 
place, or thing from a prior search only if  
issued by a judge of a district court, a court of appeals, the court of 
criminal appeals, or the supreme court. 
Search Warrants: 18.02
 
 Any magistrate who is an attorney licensed by this state may issue a 
search warrant under 18.02 (
 10
 ) to collect a blood specimen from a 
person who:
 
 is arrested for an offense under Section 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.065, 
49.07, or 49.08, Penal Code; and
 
 refuses to submit to a breath or blood alcohol test.
 Grounds for issuance: CCP 18.02
 These below may also be specifically described for search & seizure
 13.
 electronic customer data held in electronic storage, including the contents 
of and records and other information related to a wire communication or 
electronic communication held in electronic storage; or
 14.
 a cellular telephone or other wireless communications device, subject to 
Article 18.0215.
 18.0215:  ACCESS TO CELL PHONE OR  
OTHER WIRELESS DEVICE. 

 Peace officers may not search cell
without a warrant:
 
 phones or wireless devices, pursuant to a lawful arrest 
They may only be issued by judges in the same judicial district for:
 (1)  peace officer’s agency if in the officer's possession; or
 (2)  the likely location of the telephone or device.
 
 Only officers may apply for warrants under this article & applications must be written, signed & 
sworn to, or affirmed before judges that: 
(1)  state the name, department, agency, & address of the applicant;
 (2)  identify the device to be searched;
 (3)  state the name of the owner or possessor device to be searched;
 (4)  state the judicial district for: the peace officer’s agency if in the officer's possession or likely 
location of the device; & 
(5)  state the facts & circumstances for probable cause to believe:
 criminal activity has been, is, or will be committed; and
 
 searching the device is likely to produce evidence in the investigation
 
 Access to Wireless Devices
 
 Officers may search a device without a warrant if:
 
 Not prohibited by other law and
 
 owner or possessor consents;
 
 device is reported stolen by the owner or possessor; or
 
 officer reasonably believes that:
 
 the device is in the possession of a fugitive with a felony warrant; or
 
 there exists an immediate life
threatening situation, under 18A.201
 
 hostage, barricade, or other emergency where a person unlawfully & directly: threatens another 
with death; or exposes to risk of SBI
 
Officer must apply for a device warrant as soon as practicable after a search is conducted during a 
fugitive or life
 threatening situation
 
 If the judge finds that the situation did not occur and declines the warrant, any evidence obtained 
is not admissible in a criminal action
 Any magistrate who is an attorney licensed by this state may issue a search warrant 
under 18.02 (10) to collect a blood specimen from a person who: 
is arrested for an offense under Section 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.065, 49.07, or 
49.08, Penal Code; and refuses to submit to a breath or blood alcohol test. 
16
 :
 17
 18
 19
 CCP 18.02 continued 
(13) electronic customer data held in electronic storage, including the contents of and 
records and other information related to a wire communication or electronic 
communication held in electronic storage; or 
(14) a cellular telephone or other wireless communications device, subject to Article 
18.0215. 
(b) For purposes of Subsection (a)(13):  
(1) "Electronic communication" and "wire communication" have the meanings 
assigned by Article 18A.001. 
(2) "Electronic customer data" and "electronic storage" have the meanings assigned 
by Article 18B.001. 
Peace officers may not search cell-phones or wireless devices, pursuant to a lawful 
arrest without a warrant: 
They may only be issued by judges in the same judicial district for: 
(1)  peace officer’s agency if in the officer's possession; or 
(2)  the likely location of the telephone or device. 
Only officers may apply for warrants under this article & applications must 
be written, signed & sworn to, or affirmed before judges that:  
(1)  state the name, department, agency, & address of the applicant; 
(2)  identify the device to be searched; 
(3)  state the name of the owner or possessor device to be searched; 
(4)  state the judicial district for: the peace officer’s agency if in the 
officer's possession or likely location of the device; &  
(5)  state the facts & circumstances for probable cause to believe: 
criminal activity has been, is, or will be committed; and 
searching the device is likely to produce evidence in the 
investigation 
Officers may search a device without a warrant if: 
Not prohibited by other law and owner or possessor consents; 
device is reported stolen by the owner or possessor; orofficer reasonably believes 
that: 
the device is in the possession of a fugitive with a felony warrant; or 
there exists an immediate life-threatening situation, under 18A.201 
hostage, barricade, or other emergency where a person unlawfully & directly: 
threatens another with death; or exposes to risk of SBI 
Officer must apply for a device warrant as soon as practicable after a search is 
conducted during a fugitive or life-threatening situation 
If the judge finds that the situation did not occur and declines the warrant, any 
evidence obtained is not admissible in a criminal action 
Access electronic customer data held in 
electronic storage
 
 18B.354. WARRANT ISSUED IN THIS STATE: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF 
WARRANT
 
 (a) a 
district judge 
may issue a search warrant under this article for 
electronic 
customer data held in electronic storage
 . 

 i.e
 Google Drives, Snapchat, Instagram, Facebook
 Issuance of search warrant to 
photograph injured child 

CCP 18.021
 May be issued to search & photograph a child victim of injury to a child, 
aggravated & sex assault, or continuous sex abuse.
 
 The sworn affidavit must establish probable cause that: 
a specific offense was committed to a specifically described victim;
 
 
 evidence of the offense or evidence that a person committed the offense can be detected by 
photographic means;  and
 the person to be searched for & photographed is located at the place
 
 
 In addition to 18.04, a warrant shall identify as near as may be: 
child to be located & photo'd, name/describe the place/thing for search, & 

 command any officer of the county to search for & photograph the child
 
 
 Agency photographer may access & act under an officer’s direction
 
 Officer or assistant shall be a person of the same sex as the victim
 
 Child may not be removed from the premises found except under FC 262, subchapters A & B
 
 After execution, officers shall take possession photos & deliver it forthwith to the magistrate  
20
 21
 Art. 18B.354. WARRANT ISSUED IN THIS STATE: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF 
WARRANT. (a) On the filing of an application by an authorized peace officer, a district 
judge may issue a search warrant under this article for electronic customer data held 
in electronic storage, including the contents of and records and other information 
related to a wire or electronic communication held in electronic storage, by a 
provider of an electronic communications service or a provider of a remote 
computing service described by Article 18B.355(b), regardless of whether the 
customer data is held at a location in this state or another state. An application made 
under this subsection must demonstrate probable cause for the issuance of the 
warrant and must be supported by the oath of the authorized peace officer. 
(b) A search warrant may not be issued under this article unless the sworn affidavit 
required by Article 18.01(b) provides sufficient and substantial facts to establish 
probable cause that: 
(1) a specific offense has been committed; and 
(2) the electronic customer data sought: 
(A) constitutes evidence of that offense or evidence that a particular person 
committed that offense; and 
(B) is held in electronic storage by the service provider on which the warrant is served 
under Article 18B.355(c). 
(c) Only the electronic customer data described in the sworn affidavit required by 
Article 18.01(b) may be seized under the warrant. 
(d) A warrant issued under this article shall run in the name of "The State of Texas." 
(e) Article 18.011 applies to an affidavit presented under Article 18.01(b) for the 
issuance of a warrant under this article, and the affidavit may be sealed in the 
manner provided by that article. 
Art. 18.021. ISSUANCE OF SEARCH WARRANT TO PHOTOGRAPH INJURED CHILD. (a) 
A search warrant may be issued to search for and photograph a child who is alleged 
to be the victim of the offenses of injury to a child as prohibited by Section 22.04, 
Penal Code; sexual assault of a child as prohibited by Section 22.011(a), Penal Code; 
aggravated sexual assault of a child as prohibited by Section 22.021, Penal Code; or 
continuous sexual abuse of young child or disabled individual as prohibited by Section 
21.02, Penal Code. 
(b) The officer executing the warrant may be accompanied by a photographer who is 
employed by a law enforcement agency and who acts under the direction of the 
officer executing the warrant. The photographer is entitled to access to the child in 
the same manner as the officer executing the warrant. 
(c) In addition to the requirements of Subdivisions (1), (4), and (5) of Article 18.04 of 
this code, a warrant issued under this article shall identify, as near as may be, the 
child to be located and photographed, shall name or describe, as near as may be, the 
place or thing to be searched, and shall command any peace officer of the proper 
county to search for and cause the child to be photographed. 
(d) After having located and photographed the child, the peace officer executing the 
warrant shall take possession of the exposed film and deliver it forthwith to the 
magistrate. The child may not be removed from the premises on which he or she is 
located except under Subchapters A and B, Chapter 262, Family Code. 
(e) A search warrant under this section shall be executed by a peace officer of the 
same sex as the alleged victim or, if the officer is not of the same sex as the alleged 
victim, the peace officer must be assisted by a person of the same sex as the alleged 
victim. The person assisting an officer under this subsection must be acting under the 
direction of the officer and must be with the alleged victim during the taking of the 
photographs. 
Search Warrants DEFINED: CCP 18.01
 
 Written orders, issued by a magistrate and directed to a peace officer, commanding 
him to search for any property or thing and to seize the same and 

 bring it before such magistrate or commanding him to search for and photograph a child 
and 

 to deliver to the magistrate any of the film exposed pursuant to the order. 

 Except for 18.011 
affidavits
 becomes public info upon execution & are available for 
public inspection
 Sealing of Affidavit 

CCP 18.011
 Felony prosecutor may request a district or appellate judge to seal with a 
compelling state interest that:
 
 Public disclosure would jeopardize the safety of a victim, witness, confidential informant, or 
destruction of evidence 

 Or affidavit contains info from an un
expired court ordered wire
 st
 
 If granted, it expires on the 31
 day after execution
 
 Only 1
30 day extension can be requested (before expiration)
 
 This does not 
prohibit the:
 
tap
 disclosure of info on the contents of a search warrant, its return, or the inventory of property taken; 
or
 the right of a defendant to discover the contents of an affidavit.
 
 Contents of warrant CCP 18.04
 
 It shall contain the following requisites:
 
 Run in the name of "The State of Texas,”
 
 identify, as near as may be, that which is to be seized,
 
 name or describe, as near as may be, the person, place, or thing to be 
searched, 

 command any peace officer of the proper county to search forthwith the 
person, place, or thing named 

 dated and signed by the magistrate, and
 
 the magistrate's name appear in clearly legible handwriting or in typewritten 
form with the magistrate's signature
 Advantages of a search warrant (Intermediate CS)
 
 Evidence seized may be more readily accepted by courts 

 An officer may be protected from civil liability.  

 May shift the legal burden to the defendant to show the evidence was 
seized illegally.
 Written orders, issued by a magistrate and directed to a peace officer, commanding 
him to search for any property or thing and to seize the same and  
bring it before such magistrate or commanding him to search for and 
photograph a child and  
to deliver to the magistrate any of the film exposed pursuant to the order.  
22
 23
 Except for 18.011 affidavits becomes public info upon execution & are available for 
public inspection 
Art. 18.011. SEALING OF AFFIDAVIT. (a) An attorney representing the state in the 
prosecution of felonies may request a district judge or the judge of an appellate court 
to seal an affidavit presented under Article 18.01(b). The judge may order the 
affidavit sealed if the attorney establishes a compelling state interest in that: 
(1) public disclosure of the affidavit would jeopardize the safety of a victim, witness, 
or confidential informant or cause the destruction of evidence; or 
(2) the affidavit contains information obtained from a court-ordered wiretap that has 
not expired at the time the attorney representing the state requests the sealing of 
the affidavit. 
(b) An order sealing an affidavit under this section expires on the 31st day after the 
date on which the search warrant for which the affidavit was presented is executed. 
After an original order sealing an affidavit is issued under this article, an attorney 
representing the state in the prosecution of felonies may request, and a judge may 
grant, before the 31st day after the date on which the search warrant for which the 
affidavit was presented is executed, on a new finding of compelling state interest, 
one 30-day extension of the original order. 
(c) On the expiration of an order issued under Subsection (b) and any extension, the 
affidavit must be unsealed. 
24
 25
 (d) An order issued under this section may not: 
(1) prohibit the disclosure of information relating to the contents of a search warrant, 
the return of a search warrant, or the inventory of property taken pursuant to a 
search warrant; or 
(2) affect the right of a defendant to discover the contents of an affidavit. 
Art. 18.04. CONTENTS OF WARRANT.  
A search warrant issued under this chapter, Chapter 18A, or Chapter 18B shall be 
sufficient if it contains the following requisites: 
(1) that it run in the name of "The State of Texas"; 
(2) that it identify, as near as may be, that which is to be seized and name or describe, 
as near as may be, the person, place, or thing to be searched; 
(3) that it command any peace officer of the proper county to search forthwith the 
person, place, or thing named; 
(4) that it be dated and signed by the magistrate; and 
(5) that the magistrate's name appear in clearly legible handwriting or in typewritten 
form with the magistrate's signature. 
Advantages of a search warrant 
Evidence seized may be more readily accepted by courts  
An officer may be protected from civil liability.   
May shift the legal burden to the defendant to show the evidence was seized illegally 
Warrants for fire, health and code 
inspections 
CCP 18.05
 
 May be issued to inspect any specified premises for the:
 
 presence of a fire or health hazard or unsafe building condition;
 
 violation of any fire, health, building regulation, statute, or ordinance
 
 May be issued to a state, county, city, or other political subdivision’s fire marshal, 
health officer, or code enforcement when:
 
 PC of fire/health hazard, violation, or unsafe building condition such as:  
The type, age, general condition, & use purpose of the premises 

 
 The presence of hazards or violations in and the general condition of premises near the premises sought 
to be inspected
 City/county may designate 1 or more code enforcement officials for this 

 
 Other political subdivisions may designate not more than 1, only if they routinely inspect premises for the 
above reasons
 
 Search warrants may not be issued here to county code enforcement with a population of 3.3 
million or more to inspect for an unsafe building condition or violation of a building regulation, 
statute, or ordinance.  
Execution of warrants & 
Days Allowed to Run: CCP 18.06 & 18.07:
 
 Officers shall execute it without delay & forthwith return to the proper magistrate 

 Upon searching the place ordered, officers shall:
 
 present a copy of the warrant to the owner, someone in possession, or leave a copy
 
 before taking property, prepare a written inventory of the property
 
 legibly endorse his name on the inventory, and
 
 present a inventory copy to the owner, possessor, or leave one
 
 Run times below exclude the day of issuance & execution:
 
 Unless a shorter period is given, a typical search warrant is: 

 18B.354: 
10 days
 3 days
 , unless specified sooner, for electronic customer data held in electronic 
storage, by a provider of an electronic communications or remote computing service
 
 15 days
 for DNA specimens for DNA analysis & comparison, including blood and saliva samples
 26
 27
 Art. 18.05. WARRANTS FOR FIRE, HEALTH, AND CODE INSPECTIONS. 
(a) Except as provided by Subsection (e) of this article, a search warrant may be 
issued to a fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement official of the state or of 
any county, city, or other political subdivision for the purpose of allowing the 
inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a fire or health 
hazard or unsafe building condition or a violation of any fire, health, or building 
regulation, statute, or ordinance. 
(b) A search warrant may not be issued under this article except upon the 
presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a fire or health hazard or 
violation or unsafe building condition is present in the premises sought to be 
inspected. 
(c) In determining probable cause, the magistrate is not limited to evidence of specific 
knowledge, but may consider any of the following: 
(1) the age and general condition of the premises;  
(2) previous violations or hazards found present in the premises;  
(3) the type of premises;  
(4) the purposes for which the premises are used; and 
(5) the presence of hazards or violations in and the general condition of premises 
near the premises sought to be inspected. 
(d) Each city or county may designate one or more code enforcement officials for the 
purpose of being issued a search warrant as authorized by Subsection (a) of this 
article. A political subdivision other than a city or county may designate not more 
than one code enforcement official for the purpose of being issued a search warrant 
as authorized by Subsection (a) of this article only if the political subdivision routinely 
inspects premises to determine whether there is a fire or health hazard or unsafe 
building condition or a violation of fire, health, or building regulation, statute, or 
ordinance. 
(e) A search warrant may not be issued under this article to a code enforcement 
official of a county with a population of 3.3 million or more for the purpose of 
allowing the inspection of specified premises to determine the presence of an unsafe 
building condition or a violation of a building regulation, statute, or ordinance. 
Art. 18.06. EXECUTION OF WARRANTS.  
(a) A peace officer to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute the warrant 
without delay and shall return the warrant to the proper magistrate.  
(b) On searching the place ordered to be searched, the officer executing the warrant 
shall present a copy of the warrant to the owner of the place, if he is present. If the 
owner of the place is not present but a person who is present is in possession of the 
place, the officer shall present a copy of the warrant to the person. Before the officer 
takes property from the place, he shall prepare a written inventory of the property to 
be taken. He shall legibly endorse his name on the inventory and present a copy of 
the inventory to the owner or other person in possession of the property. If neither 
the owner nor a person in possession of the property is present when the officer 
executes the warrant, the officer shall leave a copy of the warrant and the inventory 
at the place. 
Art. 18.065. EXECUTION OF WARRANT ISSUED BY DISTRICT JUDGE FOR DNA 
SPECIMEN. 
(a) A warrant issued by the judge of a district court under Article 18.02(a)(10) to 
collect a DNA specimen from a person for the purpose of connecting that person to 
an offense may be executed in any county in this state. 
(b) This article does not apply to a warrant issued by a justice of the peace, judge, or 
other magistrate other than a judge of a district court 
Art. 18.067. EXECUTION OF WARRANT FOR BLOOD SPECIMEN IN INTOXICATION 
OFFENSE. Notwithstanding any other law, a warrant issued under Article 18.02(a)(10) 
to collect a blood specimen from a person suspected of committing an intoxication 
offense under Section 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.061, 49.065, 49.07, or 49.08, 
Penal Code, may be executed: 
(1) in any county adjacent to the county in which the warrant was issued; and 
(2) by any law enforcement officer authorized to make an arrest in the county of 
execution. 
Art. 18.07. DAYS ALLOWED FOR WARRANT TO RUN. (a) Unless the magistrate directs 
in the warrant a shorter period for the execution of any search warrant issued under 
this chapter, Chapter 18A, or Chapter 18B, the period allowed for the execution of 
the warrant, exclusive of the day of its issuance and of the day of its execution, is: 
(1) 15 whole days if the warrant is issued solely to search for and seize specimens 
from a specific person for DNA analysis and comparison, including blood and saliva 
samples; 
(2) 10 whole days if the warrant is issued under Article 18B.354 or Subchapter G-1, 
Chapter 18B; or 
(3) three whole days if the warrant is issued for a purpose other than that described 
by Subdivision (1) or (2). 
(b) The magistrate issuing a search warrant under this chapter, Chapter 18A, or 
Chapter 18B shall endorse on the search warrant the date and hour of its issuance. 
(c) If a warrant is issued to search for and seize data or information contained in or on 
a computer, disk drive, flash drive, cellular telephone, or other electronic, 
communication, or data storage device, the warrant is considered to have been 
executed within the time allowed under Subsection (a) if the device was seized 
before the expiration of the time allowed. Notwithstanding any other law, any data 
or information contained in or on a device seized may be recovered and analyzed 
after the expiration of the time allowed under Subsection (a). 
Power of officer executing warrant
 CCP 18.08
 Art. 18.08. POWER OF OFFICER EXECUTING WARRANT. In the execution of a search 
warrant, the officer may call to his aid any number of citizens in this county, who shall 
be bound to aid in the execution of the same. 
In the execution of a search warrant, the officer may call to 
his aid any number of citizens in this county, who shall be 
bound to aid in the execution of the same. 
28
 What can you do with those present during 
a search warrant’s execution
 Shall seize accused & property CCP 18.09
 29
 
 When the property directed to search for & seize is found, the officer 
shall take possession and:
 
 carry it before the magistrate
 
 arrest any person whom he is directed to arrest & immediately take such person 
before the magistrate
 
 "seizure" in the context of property = 

 restraint of property, whether by physical force or display of an officer's authority, and 

 includes the collection of property or act of taking possession
 30
 Muehler V. Mena USSC 544 US 93 (2005) 
Do police officer violate the fourth amendment by detaining innocent occupants of a 
home in which a search warrant is being executed, for the duration of the search? 
No. Officers are allowed to detain the premises’ occupants while the search occurs.  
Art. 18.09. SHALL SEIZE ACCUSED AND PROPERTY.  
When the property which the officer is directed to search for and seize is found he 
shall take possession of the same and carry it before the magistrate. He shall also 
arrest any person whom he is directed to arrest by the warrant and immediately take 
such person before the magistrate. For purposes of this chapter, "seizure," in the 
context of property, means the restraint of property, whether by physical force or by 
a display of an officer's authority, and includes the collection of property or the act of 
taking possession of property. 
Seizure of Circuit Board 
CCP 18.095
 
 In a search & seize of a gambling device, equipment, altered 
equipment, or paraphernalia, it’s the officer discretion to:
 
 seize only the programmable main circuit board of the device if the board is 
designed as a subassembly or 

 essential part of device, equipment, or paraphernalia to provide the info 
necessary for gambling
 
 Carry the circuit board before the magistrate, and 

 Retain custody of the circuit board as the property seized. 
Custody & How return made: 
CCP 18.10 and 18.11
 
 Not later than 3 whole days after the execution, officer:
 
 31
 Upon returning, shall state on the back of the warrant or paper attached, the manner it 
was executed
 
 shall deliver a copy of the inventory of the property taken into his possession 

 who seized the property, shall retain custody of it until the magistrate issues an order 
for safekeeping the property:
 
 Property may not be removed from the county in which it was seized without an order from 
a magistrate in the county
 
 This does not prevent the officer or department from forwarding any item(s) to a laboratory 
for scientific analysis. 
Return and Inventory Example
 32
 33
 No Knock Search Warrants v. 
Knock & Announce Warrants 
34
 Art. 18.095. SEIZURE OF CIRCUIT BOARD OF GAMBLING DEVICE, EQUIPMENT, OR 
PARAPHERNALIA. For purposes of this chapter, an officer directed under a search 
warrant to search for and seize a gambling device or equipment, altered gambling 
equipment, or gambling paraphernalia in the discretion of the officer may: 
(1) seize only the programmable main circuit board of the device, equipment, or 
paraphernalia if that circuit board is designed as a subassembly or essential part of 
the device, equipment, or paraphernalia to provide the information necessary for the 
device, equipment, or paraphernalia to operate as a gambling device or equipment, 
altered gambling equipment, or gambling paraphernalia; 
(2) carry the circuit board before the magistrate; and 
(3) retain custody of the circuit board as the property seized pursuant to the warrant 
as required under this chapter. 
Art. 18.10. HOW RETURN MADE. 
(a) Not later than three whole days after executing a search warrant, the officer shall 
return the search warrant. Upon returning the search warrant, the officer shall state 
on the back of the same, or on some paper attached to it, the manner in which the 
warrant has been executed. The officer shall also deliver to the magistrate a copy of 
the inventory of the property taken into his possession under the warrant. The failure 
of an officer to make a timely return of an executed search warrant or to submit an 
inventory of the property taken into the officer's possession under the warrant does 
not bar the admission of evidence under Article 38.23. The officer who seized the 
property shall retain custody of it until the magistrate issues an order directing the 
manner of safekeeping the property. Except as otherwise provided by Subsection (b), 
the property may not be removed from the county in which it was seized without an 
order approving the removal, issued by a magistrate in the county in which the 
warrant was issued; provided, however, nothing herein shall prevent the officer, or 
his department, from forwarding any item or items seized to a laboratory for 
scientific analysis. 
(b) For the purposes of complying with this article, property seized pursuant to a 
warrant executed under Article 18.067 may be removed from the county in which it 
was seized and returned to the county in which the warrant was issued without a 
court order. 
Art. 18.11. CUSTODY OF PROPERTY FOUND.  
Property seized pursuant to a search warrant shall be kept as provided by the order 
of a magistrate issued in accordance with Article 18.10 of this code. 
• Show and discuss the example inventory paperwork pic 
Wilson v Arkansas USSC  514 US 927 (1995) 
Is the common-law knock and announce rule part of the fourth amendments 
reasonableness requirement governing searches? 
Yes. The fourth amendment ordinarily requires officers to knock and announce their 
authority before entering a home to execute a warrant.  
However, that rule is not meant to be inflexible rule. Courts should evaluate the 
reasonableness of a no-knock warrant on a case-by-case basis. 
No Knock Search Warrants v. 
Knock & Announce Warrants 

 Exceptions are a “reasonable suspicion” that knocking and announcing would:
 
 Present a threat of physical violence, such as criminal history or propensity for violence,
 
 Be futile or a “useless” gesture, or
 
 Result in the likelihood that evidence would be destroyed.
 
 No knock warrants can be obtained when this reasonable 
suspicion is articulated in the warrant
 THE END: Questions?
 10.10. Discuss the difference between no knock search warrant vs knock and 
announce warrant.  
• Purpose of “no knock” warrant allows officers to enter the premises without 
warning to occupants…to protect officers from being shot if occupants are known to 
be armed or to prevent disposal of contraband.  
• Disadvantage of “no knock” warrant: Occupant may believe being attacked by home 
invaders and try to defend self.  
35
 36
 • “Knock and announce” entry is designed to let occupants know its police that want 
to enter premises…they knock and announce presence and wait a reasonable amount 
of time. Both parties less at risk if door is opened peacefully.  
• Disadvantage of “knock and announce”: Could give time for occupants to reach for 
weapons or destroy evidence.  
• However, little difference in how carried out: in knock and announce, officers have 
to knock on door, but it does not specify how loud the knock and announcement has 
to be, nor how long they need to wait for response. So, the difference is of just a few 
seconds.  
Conclusion 
• Q/A session over key areas might be helpful for the students’ retention. 
• Be available for student questions 
• Remind students that they not only need to understand this material but be able 
to apply the material as well 