• Instructor Intro if needed 
Introduction 
Juvenile Issues
 Deputy Chief Derek Bradford #1120
 Basic Peace Officer Course
 City of Denton Police Department
 Now more than ever
 School Resource Officers
 Are you asking yourself, what 
will I be learning about?
 1. The statutory authority and requirements for conducting 
investigations involving juveniles.  
2. The nature of juvenile issues. 
Statutory authority and 
requirements for conducting 
investigations involving juveniles
 51.01. PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION 
(1) protection of the public and public safety; (2) consistent with #1
 (A) promote the concept of punishment for criminal acts;
 (B) remove, where appropriate, the taint of criminality from offending children; and
 (C) provide treatment, training, & rehab, emphasizing parent-child, accountability-responsibility;
 (3) provide for their care, protection, & wholesome moral, mental, & physical development;
 (4) protect community welfare and control unlawful acts by children;
 (5) to achieve these in a family environment whenever possible, separating child and 
parent only when give proper parental care; and 
(6) provide a simple judicial procedure to execute & enforce FC provisions, assure 
parties a fair hearing, and recognize and enforce their constitutional and legal rights
 • Unit Goal: Conducting investigations involving juveniles.  
Presentation 
• The statutory authority and requirements for conducting investigations 
involving juveniles.   
• The nature of juvenile issues.  
14.1.1 Identify the purpose of Title III, Juvenile Justice Code, as it relates to 
juvenile Investigations 
Purpose and interpretation  Family Code Chapter 51.01 
51.01. PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION. This title shall be construed to 
effectuate the following public purposes: 
(1) to provide for the protection of the public and public safety; 
(2) consistent with the protection of the public and public safety: 
(A) to promote the concept of punishment for criminal acts; 
(B) to remove, where appropriate, the taint of criminality from children 
committing certain unlawful acts; and 
(C) to provide treatment, training, and rehabilitation that emphasizes the 
accountability and responsibility of both the parent and the child for the child's 
conduct; 
(3) to provide for the care, the protection, and the wholesome moral, mental, 
and physical development of children coming within its provisions; 
(4) to protect the welfare of the community and to control the commission of 
unlawful acts by children; 
(5) to achieve the foregoing purposes in a family environment whenever 
possible, separating the child from the child's parents only when necessary for 
the child's welfare or in the interest of public safety and when a child is 
removed from the child's family, to give the child the care that should be 
provided by parents; and 
(6) to provide a simple judicial procedure through which the provisions of this 
t
 itle are executed and enforced and in which the parties are assured a fair 
hearing and their constitutional and other legal rights recognized and enforced. 
Sec. 51.02. KEY DEFINITIONS
 (2) Child: 10-16 OR 17+ & under 18 with delinquent conduct or CINS before 17
 (9) Parent: mother or the father of a child, NOT with terminated parental rights
 (3) Custodian: adult with whom the child resides.
 (4) Guardian: court ordered guardian, person or a public/private agency
 Sec. 51.02. KEY DEFINITIONS
 (3-a)  "Dual status child" = has been referred to the juvenile justice system & is:
 (A) in the temporary/permanent managing conservatorship of DFPS; 
(B) DFPS case subject that family-based safety services have been offered/provided;
 (C) alleged abuse/neglect victim in an open child protective investigation; or
 (D) victim in an INVESTIGATED case that DFPS found to belief of abuse or neglect
 Sec. 51.02. KEY DEFINITIONS
 (8) "Nonoffender" means a child who:
 (A) Is subject to court jurisdiction under abuse, dependency, or neglect 
statutes under Title 5 for reasons other than illegal child conduct; or
 (B) Is in custody and held solely for deportation out of the United States.
 (16) "Traffic offense" = 729 Transportation Code violations that are Fine only or 
motor vehicle traffic ordinances of a Texas incorporated city or town
 51.02. DEFINITIONS. In this title: 
(2) "Child" means a person who is: 
(A) ten years of age or older and under 17 years of age; or 
(B) seventeen years of age or older and under 18 years of age who is alleged or 
found to have engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for 
supervision as a result of acts committed before becoming 17 years of age. 
(3) "Custodian" means the adult with whom the child resides. 
(4) "Guardian" means the person who, under court order, is the guardian of the 
person of the child or the public or private agency with whom the child has 
been placed by a court. 
(9) "Parent" means the mother or the father of a child, but does not include a 
parent whose parental rights have been terminated. 
(3-a) "Dual status child" means a child who has been referred to the juvenile 
justice system and is: 
(A) in the temporary or permanent managing conservatorship of the 
Department of Family and Protective Services; 
(B) the subject of a case for which family-based safety services have been 
offered or provided by the department; 
(C) an alleged victim of abuse or neglect in an open child protective 
investigation; or 
(D) a victim in a case in which, after an investigation, the department concluded 
there was reason to believe the child was abused or neglected. 
(8) "Nonoffender" means a child who: 
(A) is subject to jurisdiction of a court under abuse, dependency, or neglect 
statutes under Title 5 for reasons other than legally prohibited conduct of the 
child; or 
(B) has been taken into custody and is being held solely for deportation out of 
the United States. 
(16) "Traffic offense" means: 
(A) a violation of a penal statute cognizable under Chapter 729, Transportation 
Code, except for conduct for which the person convicted may be sentenced to 
imprisonment or confinement in jail; or 
(B) a violation of a motor vehicle traffic ordinance of an incorporated city or 
town in this state. 
51.02 (15) Status Offender: a child 
 Accused/adjudicated/convicted for conduct that would not be criminal for an adult: 
(A) running away under 51.03(b)(2);
 (B) 51.03(b)(1) fine only offense (51.08 Transferred), NOT traffic, & NOT an adult offense type
 (C) violation of standards of student conduct under 51.03(b)(4);
 (D) violation of the Alcoholic Beverage Code applicable to minors only; or
 (E)  violation of any other fineable and juvenile only offense under PC 8.07(a)(4 or 5)
 So, simply put, status offenses are:
 Truancy 
Runaway
 Student Code of Conduct Violations
 TABC Violations applicable only to minors 
Class C or Municipal violations applicable only to minors, 
except traffic offenses 
More 51.02 Definitions
 (10) "Party" means the state, a child who is the subject of proceedings under this subtitle, or the 
child's parent, spouse, guardian, or guardian ad litem.
 (11) "Prosecuting attorney" means the county attorney, district attorney, or other attorney who 
regularly serves in a prosecutory capacity in a juvenile court.
 (12) "Referral to juvenile court" means the referral of a child or a child's case to the office or 
official, including an intake officer or probation officer, designated by the juvenile board to 
process children within the juvenile justice system.
 (17) "Valid court order" = order entered under Section 54.04 concerning a child adjudicated to 
have engaged in conduct indicating a need for supervision as a status offender.
 Correctional vs Detention 
(public or private residential facilities)
 13) "Secure correctional facility" 
(A) includes construction fixtures for physically restriction of juvenile 
movements and activities of juveniles or other individuals held in 
lawful custody in the facility; and
 (B) placement of any juvenile who has been 
adjudicated
 or
 any nonoffender or other individual convicted
 of a criminal offense
 14) "Secure detention facility" 
(B) temporary placement of any juvenile who is 
accused of an offense
 or
 any nonoffender or other individual accused of 
a criminal offense.
 (15) "Status offender" means a child who is accused, adjudicated, or convicted 
for conduct that would not, under state law, be a crime if committed by an 
adult, including: 
(A) running away from home under Section 51.03(b)(2); 
(B) a fineable only offense under Section 51.03(b)(1) transferred to the juvenile 
court under Section 51.08(b), but only if the conduct constituting the offense 
would not have been criminal if engaged in by an adult; 
(C) a violation of standards of student conduct as described by Section 
51.03(b)(4); 
(D) a violation of a provision of the Alcoholic Beverage Code applicable to 
minors only; or 
(E) a violation of any other fineable only offense under Section 8.07(a)(4) or (5), 
Penal Code, but only if the conduct constituting the offense would not have 
been criminal if engaged in by an adult. 
Status offenses are: 
• Truancy  
• Runaway 
• Student Code of Conduct Violations 
• TABC Violations applicable only to minors  
• Class C or Municipal violations applicable only to minors, except traffic 
offenses  
(10) "Party" means the state, a child who is the subject of proceedings under 
this subtitle, or the child's parent, spouse, guardian, or guardian ad litem. 
(11) "Prosecuting attorney" means the county attorney, district attorney, or 
other attorney who regularly serves in a prosecutory capacity in a juvenile 
court. 
(12) "Referral to juvenile court" means the referral of a child or a child's case to 
the office or official, including an intake officer or probation officer, designated 
by the juvenile board to process children within the juvenile justice system. 
(17) "Valid court order" means a court order entered under Section 54.04 
concerning a child adjudicated to have engaged in conduct indicating a need for 
supervision as a status offender. 
The court process and paperwork are similar to adult investigations.  
(13) "Secure correctional facility" means any public or private residential 
facility, including an alcohol or other drug treatment facility, that: 
(A) includes construction fixtures designed to physically restrict the movements 
and activities of juveniles or other individuals held in lawful custody in the 
facility; and 
(B) is used for the placement of any juvenile who has been adjudicated as 
having committed an offense, any nonoffender, or any other individual 
convicted of a criminal offense. 
(14) "Secure detention facility" means any public or private residential facility 
that: 
(A) includes construction fixtures designed to physically restrict the movements 
and activities of juveniles or other individuals held in lawful custody in the 
facility; and 
(B) is used for the temporary placement of any juvenile who is accused of 
having committed an offense, any nonoffender, or any other individual accused 
of having committed a criminal offense. 
Restrained to the degree associated with formal arrest:  
Custody 
Restrained to the degree associated with formal arrest. 
Adults are Arrested
 ➢Juveniles are Taken into Custody
 Adult vs. Juvenile
 17 yrs. age or older
 Charged by Indictment
 Bond hearing
 Found “guilty”
 Criminal in nature
 Arrested 
Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
 10yrs. – 16 yrs. of age
 Charged by Petition
 Detention Hearing
 Found delinquent
 Mainly Civil
 Taken into Custody
 Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
 51.03 Delinquent conduct vs Conduct Indicating a Need 
for Supervision (CINS)
 a) DELINQUENT CONDUCT
 1) Except traffic, MOST Class B/above offenses; 
2) Violation of Court Orders from JP, Municipal, or County Class C’s, constituting 
contempt;
 3) PC Intoxicated offenses while Driving, Flying, Boating, & Intox: Assault & Manslaughter; 
or
 4) ABC 106.041 3+ offenses related to Driving/ Flying/Boating Under the Influence
 Delinquent Conduct
 • Adults are Arrested 
• Juveniles are Taken into Custody 
(5) "Judge" or "juvenile court judge" means the judge of a juvenile court. 
(6) "Juvenile court" means a court designated under Section 51.04 of this code 
to exercise jurisdiction over proceedings under this title. 
(7) "Law-enforcement officer" means a peace officer as defined by Article 
2A.001, Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(8-a) "Nonsecure correctional facility" means a facility described by Section 
51.126. 
Adult Case Terminology vs. Juvenile Case Terminology  
• Criminal Offense vs. Delinquent conduct  
• Code of Criminal Procedure vs. Family Code  
• Arrest Warrant vs. Directive to Apprehend  
• Indictment/Information vs. Juvenile Petition  
• Defendant vs. Respondent  
• Conviction vs. Adjudication  
• Sentencing Hearing vs. Disposition Hearing  
• Guilty/Not Guilty Plea vs. Plea of True/Not True  
33.3. Define delinquent conduct; conduct indicating a need for supervision.  
51.03. DELINQUENT CONDUCT; CONDUCT INDICATING A NEED FOR 
SUPERVISION. (a) Delinquent conduct is: 
(1) conduct, other than a traffic offense, that violates a penal law of this state or 
of the United States punishable by imprisonment or by confinement in jail; 
(2) conduct that violates a lawful order of a court under circumstances that 
would constitute contempt of that court in: 
(A) a justice or municipal court; 
(B) a county court for conduct punishable only by a fine; or 
(C) a truancy court; 
(3) conduct that violates Section 49.04, 49.05, 49.06, 49.07, or 49.08, Penal 
Code; or 
(4) conduct that violates Section 106.041, Alcoholic Beverage Code, relating to 
driving under the influence of alcohol by a minor (third or subsequent offense). 
51.03 Delinquent conduct vs Conduct Indicating a Need 
for Supervision (CINS)
 a) DELINQUENT CONDUCT
 1) Except traffic, MOST Class B/above offenses; 
2) Violation of Court Orders from JP, Municipal, 
or County Class C’s, constituting contempt;
 3) PC Intoxicated offenses while Driving, Flying, 
Boating, & Intox: Assault & Manslaughter; or
 4) ABC 106.041 3+ offenses related to Driving/ 
Flying/Boating Under the Influence
 b) CINS
 1) Other than traffic, any Class C offense  IF
 (f) referred to juvenile court under 51.08(b)
 (e) For the purposes of Subsection (b)(2), "child" 
does not include a person who is married, 
divorced, or widowed.
 2) Runaway: substantial time/no return intent 
(e) UNLESS married, divorced, or widowed.
 3) Inhalant use offense under HSC 485.001 
4) EC 37.007(c) expulsion for violation of school 
district student code of conduct 
5) Prostitution or its Solicitation
 6) Electronic Transmission of Certain Visual 
Material Depicting a Minor
 7) FALSE REPORT TO INDUCE EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE with NO prior adjudication
 Conducting Indicating a need for 
Supervision?
 51.031. HABITUAL FELONY CONDUCT
 (a) Conduct violating a Felony above a State Jail Felony, IF: 
(1) the child has at least 2 final Felony adjudications; 
(2) 2nd previous adjudication conduct occurred after the 1st adjudication became final; and
 (3) all appeals relating to the previous adjudications have been exhausted.
 (b) an adjudication is final if placed on probation or committed to TJJ Department.
 (c) Adjudication on conduct before 1/1/1996, may not be considered here
 (b) Conduct indicating a need for supervision is: 
(1) subject to Subsection (f), conduct, other than a traffic offense, that violates: 
(A) the penal laws of this state of the grade of misdemeanor that are 
punishable by fine only; or 
(B) the penal ordinances of any political subdivision of this state; 
(2) the voluntary absence of a child from the child's home without the consent 
of the child's parent or guardian for a substantial length of time or without 
intent to return; 
(3) conduct prohibited by city ordinance or by state law involving the inhalation 
of the fumes or vapors of paint and other protective coatings or glue and other 
adhesives and the volatile chemicals itemized in Section 485.001, Health and 
Safety Code; 
(4) an act that violates a school district's previously communicated written 
standards of student conduct for which the child has been expelled under 
Section 37.007(c), Education Code; 
(5) notwithstanding Subsection (a)(1), conduct described by Section 43.02 or 
43.021, Penal Code; 
(6) notwithstanding Subsection (a)(1), conduct that violates Section 43.261, 
Penal Code; or 
(7) notwithstanding Subsection (a)(1), conduct that violates Section 42.0601, 
Penal Code, if the child has not previously been adjudicated as having engaged 
in conduct violating that section. 
(c) Nothing in this title prevents criminal proceedings against a child for perjury. 
(e) For the purposes of Subsection (b)(2), "child" does not include a person who 
is married, divorced, or widowed. 
(f) Conduct described under Subsection (b)(1) does not constitute conduct 
indicating a need for supervision unless the child has been referred to the 
juvenile court under Section 51.08(b). 
Note: see Penal Code Chapter 49.04, Penal Code Chapter 49.05, Penal Code 
Chapter 49.06, Penal Code Chapter 49.07, Penal Code Chapter 49.08 and 
Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 106.04 as these are specifically mentioned 
within Delinquent Conduct or CINS.  
51.031. HABITUAL FELONY CONDUCT. (a) Habitual felony conduct is conduct 
violating a penal law of the grade of felony, other than a state jail felony, if: 
(1) the child who engaged in the conduct has at least two previous final 
adjudications as having engaged in delinquent conduct violating a penal law of 
the grade of felony;  
(2) the second previous final adjudication is for conduct that occurred after the 
date the first previous adjudication became final; and 
(3) all appeals relating to the previous adjudications considered under 
Subdivisions (1) and (2) have been exhausted. 
(b) For purposes of this section, an adjudication is final if the child is placed on 
probation or committed to the Texas Juvenile Justice Department. 
(c) An adjudication based on conduct that occurred before January 1, 1996, 
may not be considered in a disposition made under this section. 
Be aware of the process flow depicted in the slide 
Adult Trial Components
 Arrested
 Arraignment
 Bail
 No Bail
 Pre-Trial
 Jury Trial
 Dismissal
 Plea
 Non Jury 
Trial
 Disposition
 Guilty or Not Guilty 
Punishment
 Juvenile Hearing Process
 Detained 
(Investigation)
 Taken into Custody 
(Arrested)
 Charging
 Hold
 Pre-Trial
 Jury Trial
 Release
 Plea
 Non Jury 
Trial
 Disposition
 Delinquent or Innocent  
Dismissal
 Sentencing
 Dispositions for Juveniles Punishments
 Indeterminate
 Sentence (including probation) that will terminate prior to 
juvenile’s 19th birthday
 Determinate
 Sentencing that extends past the juvenile’s 19th birthday.
 Certification
 53.045.  OFFENSES ELIGIBLE FOR 
DETERMINATE SENTENCE  
(a) Except for (e), prosecuting attorneys may refer the petition to the presiding county grand jury 
if the delinquent conduct was habitual felony conduct or included any of these:
 (1) PC 19.02, Murder;
 (2) 19.03 Capital murder;
 (3) 19.04 Manslaughter; 
(4) 20.04 Aggravated kidnapping;
 (5) 22.011, Sex assault or 22.021, Agg Sex Assault;
 (e) may not refer a 22.011(a)(2) or 22.021(a)(1)(B) & 
(2)(B), if the child is > 3 years older than the victim
 (6) 22.02, Aggravated assault;
 (7) 29.03, Aggravated robbery);
 (8) 22.04, Injury to child/elderly/disabled if 3rd Deg +
 (9) 22.05(b), Felony deadly conduct with firearm;
 (10)  HSC 481 if a 1st Degree Felony or aggravated 
controlled substance felony;
 (11) 15.03, Criminal solicitation;
 (12) 21.11(a)(1), Indecency with a child;
 (13) 15.031, Criminal solicitation of a minor;
 (14) 15.01 criminal attempt of Murder, Capital Murder, 
or offense in CCP 42.12 3g(a)(1); 
(15) 28.02, arson with bodily injury or death to anyone; 
(16) 49.08, Intoxication manslaughter; or
 (17) 15.02 Conspiracy if it includes any 1-16 provisions
 Be aware of the process flow depicted in the slide 
Holding Decisions  
•is likely to abscond; 
•lacks adequate supervision; 
•lacks a parent or other person to return him or her to court when required; 
•is a danger to himself or may threaten the public safety; or 
•was previously adjudicated for delinquent conduct and is likely to commit an 
offense if released. (§54.01(e), F.C.) 
Indeterminate: Sentence (including probation) that will terminate prior to 
juvenile’s 19th birthday 
Determinate: 1) Sentencing that extends past the juvenile’s 19th birthday 2) 
Certification as an adult 
53.045. OFFENSES ELIGIBLE FOR DETERMINATE SENTENCE. (a) Except as 
provided by Subsection (e), the prosecuting attorney may refer the petition to 
the grand jury of the county in which the court in which the petition is filed 
presides if the petition alleges that the child engaged in delinquent conduct 
that constitutes habitual felony conduct as described by Section 51.031 or that 
included the violation of any of the following provisions: 
• • Murder (§19.02, P.C.);  
• • Capital Murder (§19.03, P.C.);  
• • Manslaughter (§19.04, P.C.);  
• • Aggravated Kidnapping (§20.04, P.C.);  
• • Sexual Assault (§22.011, P.C.) or Aggravated Sexual Assault (§22.021, 
P.C.);  
• • Aggravated Assault (§22.02, P.C.);  
• • Aggravated Robbery (§29.03, P.C.);  
• • Injury to a Child, Elderly or Disabled Individual (§22.04, P.C.) (if the 
offense is punishable as a felony, other than a state jail felony);  
• • Felony Deadly Conduct (§22.05(b), P.C.) (by discharging a firearm);  
• • First Degree or Aggravated Controlled Substances Felony (Ch. 481, Health 
and Safety Code);  
• • Criminal Solicitation (§15.03, P.C.);  
• • Indecency with a Child (§21.11(a)(1), P.C.);  
• • Criminal Solicitation of a Minor (§15.031, P.C.);  
• • Criminal Attempt (§15.01, P.C.) (if the offense attempted was murder, 
capital murder or an offense listed under §3g(a)(1), Art. 42.12, C.C.P.);  
• • Arson (§28.02, P.C.) (if bodily injury or death occurs); or  
• • Intoxication Manslaughter (§49.08, P.C.).  
• PC 15.02, criminal conspiracy, if the subject offense has any of the 
provisions in (1) through (16) above. 
53.045.  Grand Jury Rules for 
DETERMINATE SENTENCES 
(b) may approve a petition by a vote of nine members in the same indictment voting manner
 (c) has all the powers to investigate the facts and circumstances relating to a petition as it has 
for other criminal activity but may not issue an indictment unless the child is transferred to a 
criminal court as provided by 54.02 
(d) If it approves of the petition, the fact of approval shall be certified to the juvenile court, and 
the certification shall be entered in the record of the case.  
For the transfer of a child to TDCJ under HRC 245.151(c), a juvenile court petition approved 
by a grand jury serves as a regular indictment presented by the grand jury.
 Couch to Serve 2 Years
 Family Code 51.04. JURISDICTION. 
“Each County has a juvenile board. 
“That board shall designate 1 or more district, criminal district, domestic relations, 
juvenile, county courts, county courts at law as the juvenile court.”
 o Who handles juveniles can be changed by authorized boards or judges.
 o Must be a Juvenile Court designated for each county at all times.
 o If a juvenile court judge/alternate is not available, any magistrate may make 
detention release determination (FC 53.02) or Conduct detention hearing (54.01)
 o Can also be a “referee” to conduct detention release/hearings but shall be a 
licensed attorney in Texas.
 52.01. TAKING INTO CUSTODY
 (a) A child may be taken into custody:
 (1) pursuant to an order of the juvenile court under the provisions of this subtitle;
 (2) pursuant to the laws of arrest;
 (3) by a law-enforcement officer, with PC that the child has engaged in:
 (A) conduct that violates a state penal law or a penal ordinance;
 (B) delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision; or
 (C) conduct that violates a condition of probation imposed by the juvenile court;
 (4) by a probation officer with PC of a juvenile court probation violation
 (5) pursuant to a directive to apprehend issued under 52.015; or
 (6) by a probation officer with PC of a 54.01 court/referee release condition violation
 (b) A grand jury may approve a petition submitted to it under this section by a 
vote of nine members of the grand jury in the same manner that the grand jury 
votes on the presentment of an indictment. 
(c) The grand jury has all the powers to investigate the facts and circumstances 
relating to a petition submitted under this section as it has to investigate other 
criminal activity but may not issue an indictment unless the child is transferred 
to a criminal court as provided by Section 54.02 of this code. 
(d) If the grand jury approves of the petition, the fact of approval shall be 
certified to the juvenile court, and the certification shall be entered in the 
record of the case. For the purpose of the transfer of a child to the Texas 
Department of Criminal Justice as provided by Section 152.00161(c) or 
245.151(c), Human Resources Code, as applicable, a juvenile court petition 
approved by a grand jury under this section is an indictment presented by the 
grand jury. 
(e) The prosecuting attorney may not refer a petition that alleges the child 
engaged in conduct that violated Section 22.011(a)(2), Penal Code, or Sections 
22.021(a)(1)(B) and (2)(B), Penal Code, unless the child is more than three years 
older than the victim of the conduct. 
Jurisdiction – Family Code Chapter 51.04: “Each County has a juvenile board. 
That board shall designate 1 or more district, criminal district, domestic 
relations, juvenile, county courts, county courts at law as the juvenile court.”  
o Who handles juveniles can be changed by authorized boards or judges.  
o Must be a Juvenile Court designated for each county at all times.  
o If a judge/ alternate of juvenile court is not available, any magistrate may 
make detention release determination (Family Code Chapter 53.02) or Conduct 
detention hearings (Family Code Chapter 54.01)  
o There can also be a “referee” to conduct detention release/ hearings. Shall be 
licensed attorney in Texas.  
33.7. Identify the legal requirements for taking a child into custody.  
52.01. TAKING INTO CUSTODY; ISSUANCE OF WARNING NOTICE. (a) A child may 
be taken into custody: 
(1) pursuant to an order of the juvenile court under the provisions of this 
subtitle; 
(2) pursuant to the laws of arrest; 
(3) by a law-enforcement officer, including a school district peace officer 
commissioned under Section 37.081, Education Code, if there is probable cause 
to believe that the child has engaged in: 
(A) conduct that violates a penal law of this state or a penal ordinance of any 
political subdivision of this state; 
(B) delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision; or 
(C) conduct that violates a condition of probation imposed by the juvenile 
court; 
(4) by a probation officer if there is probable cause to believe that the child has 
violated a condition of probation imposed by the juvenile court; 
(5) pursuant to a directive to apprehend issued as provided by Section 52.015; 
or 
(6) by a probation officer if there is probable cause to believe that the child has 
violated a condition of release imposed by the juvenile court or referee under 
Section 54.01. 
52.01. TAKING INTO CUSTODY
 (b) Taking a child into custody is NOT an arrest except for the purpose of determining 
the State/Federal legality of the custody taking (arrest) or a search
 (e) A law-enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that a child is in violation of 
the compulsory school attendance law under Section 25.085, Education Code, may take the 
child into custody for the purpose of returning the child to the school campus of the child to 
ensure the child's compliance with compulsory school attendance requirements.
 52.01. ISSUANCE OF WARNING NOTICE. 
(c) A law-enforcement officer taking a child into custody under (a) (2) and (3) MAY  issue a 
warning notice in lieu of taking the child into custody if:
 (1) guidelines for warning disposition have been issued by the officer’s agency;
 (2) the guidelines have been approved by the county juvenile board; AND
 (3) the disposition is authorized by the guidelines;
 (4) the warning notice identifies the child and describes the child's alleged conduct;
 (5) a copy of the notice is sent to the parent/guardian/custodian as soon as practicable; AND
 (6) a copy is filed with the law-enforcement agency & the office/official designated by the 
juvenile board.
 (d) A warning notice filed with the office/official designated by the juvenile board may be used 
as the basis of further action if necessary.
 (b) The taking of a child into custody is not an arrest except for the purpose of 
determining the validity of taking him into custody or the validity of a search 
under the laws and constitution of this state or of the United States. 
(e) A law-enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that a child is 
in violation of the compulsory school attendance law under Section 25.085, 
Education Code, may take the child into custody for the purpose of returning 
the child to the school campus of the child to ensure the child's compliance 
with compulsory school attendance requirements. 
(c) A law-enforcement officer authorized to take a child into custody under 
Subdivisions (2) and (3) of Subsection (a) of this section may issue a warning 
notice to the child in lieu of taking the child into custody if: 
(1) guidelines for warning disposition have been issued by the law-enforcement 
agency in which the officer works; 
(2) the guidelines have been approved by the juvenile board of the county in 
which the disposition is made; 
(3) the disposition is authorized by the guidelines; 
(4) the warning notice identifies the child and describes the child's alleged 
conduct; 
(5) a copy of the warning notice is sent to the child's parent, guardian, or 
custodian as soon as practicable after disposition; and 
(6) a copy of the warning notice is filed with the law-enforcement agency and 
the office or official designated by the juvenile board. 
(d) A warning notice filed with the office or official designated by the juvenile 
board may be used as the basis of further action if necessary. 
52.011.  DUTY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT 
OFFICER TO NOTIFY PROBATE COURT. 
(a)  In this section, "ward" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.033, Estates Code
 (b)  As soon as practicable, but not later than the first working day after the date a law 
enforcement officer takes a child who is a ward into custody under Section 52.01(a)(2) or (3), the 
law enforcement officer or other person having custody of the child shall notify the court with 
jurisdiction over the child's guardianship of the child's detention or arrest.
 52.011. DUTY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TO NOTIFY PROBATE COURT. (a) 
In this section, "ward" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.033, Estates 
Code. 
(b) As soon as practicable, but not later than the first working day after the date 
a law enforcement officer takes a child who is a ward into custody under 
Section 52.01(a)(2) or (3), the law enforcement officer or other person having 
custody of the child shall notify the court with jurisdiction over the child's 
guardianship of the child's detention or arrest. 
52.015. DIRECTIVE TO APPREHEND
 (aka Order or Immediate Custody)
 (a) On request of a law-enforcement or probation officer, a juvenile court may 
issue a directive to apprehend if there is PC to take the child into custody
 (b) On issuance, any law-enforcement/probation officer shall take into custody
 (c) An order under this section is not subject to appeal.
 CCP 45A.453 CHILDREN TAKEN INTO CUSTODY
 (a) In this article, "child" means a person who is:
 (1) at least 10 years of age and younger than 17 years of age; and
 (2) charged with or convicted of an offense that a justice or municipal court has jurisdiction 
of under Article 4.11 or 4.14.
 (b) For JP/municipal offenses, a child may be released to the parent/guardian/custodian/other 
responsible adult if(s)he promises to bring the child before the requested court [FC 52.02 (a) (1)].
 (1) is released under FC 52.02(a)(1); or
 (c) Child must be taken only to a place previously designated by the agency head as an 
appropriate place of nonsecure custody for children unless the child:
 (2) is taken before a justice or municipal court.
 CCP 45A.453. CHILDREN TAKEN INTO 
CUSTODY
 (d) Nonsecure custody must be an unlocked, multipurpose area
  A lobby, office, or interrogation room is OK if not designated, set aside, or used as a secure 
detention area & not part of a secure detention area. 
 Nonsecure custody may be a juvenile processing office under FC 52.025, if left unlocked
 (e) Nonsecure custody procedures that shall be followed for a child:
 (1) may not be secured physically to a cuffing rail, chair, desk, or any stationary 
object;
 (1) may not be secured physically to a cuffing rail, 
chair, desk, or any stationary object;
 52.015. DIRECTIVE TO APPREHEND. (a) On the request of a law-enforcement or 
probation officer, a juvenile court may issue a directive to apprehend a child if 
the court finds there is probable cause to take the child into custody under the 
provisions of this title. 
(b) On the issuance of a directive to apprehend, any law-enforcement or 
probation officer shall take the child into custody. 
(c) An order under this section is not subject to appeal. 
45A.453. CHILD TAKEN INTO CUSTODY. (a) In this article, "child" means a 
person who is: 
(1) at least 10 years of age and younger than 17 years of age; and 
(2) charged with or convicted of an offense that a justice or municipal court has 
jurisdiction of under Article 4.11 or 4.14. 
(b) A child may be released to the child's parent, guardian, custodian, or other 
responsible adult as provided by Section 52.02(a)(1), Family Code, if the child is 
taken into custody for an offense that a justice or municipal court has 
jurisdiction of under Article 4.11 or 4.14. 
(c) A child described by Subsection (b) must be taken only to a place previously 
designated by the head of the law enforcement agency with custody of the 
child as an appropriate place of nonsecure custody for children unless the child: 
(1) is released under Section 52.02(a)(1), Family Code; or 
(2) is taken before a justice or municipal court. 
(d) A place of nonsecure custody for children must be an unlocked, 
multipurpose area, such as: 
(1) a lobby, office, or interrogation room, if the area is not designated, set 
aside, or used as a secure detention area and is not part of a secure detention 
area; or 
(2) a juvenile processing office designated under Section 52.025, Family Code, if 
the area is not locked when the area is used as a place of nonsecure custody. 
(e) The following procedures shall be followed in a place of nonsecure custody 
for children: 
(1) a child may not be secured physically to a cuffing rail, chair, desk, or other 
stationary object; 
How Else Might We Detain Them?
 NO!!!!! NOT A GOOD IDEA
 CCP 45A.453 CHILDREN TAKEN INTO CUSTODY
 (e) Nonsecure custody procedures that shall be followed for a child:
 (2) may be held in the nonsecure facility only long enough to accomplish the purpose 
of ID, investigation, processing, release to parents, or transportation arranging to 
juvenile court, detention facility, secure detention facility, or JP/municipal court;
 (3) residential use of the area is prohibited; and
 (4) the child shall be under continuous visual supervision by a law enforcement officer 
or facility staff person during the time the child is in nonsecure custody.
 (f) May NOT, under any circumstances, be detained in nonsecure custody for 
more than 6 hours. Time starts when you arrive; DO NOT count time in the field
 CCP 45A.453 CHILDREN TAKEN INTO CUSTODY
 (g) If in custody for a 4.11 or 4.14 JP/municipal court offense, the child may be taken to 
a detention facility designated by the juvenile court [FC 52.02(a)(3)], only if:
 (1) the non-traffic case is transferred to the juvenile court under FC 51.08(b); or
 (2) referred to the juvenile court for contempt of court under CCP 45.050.
 (h) Except for (g-1), a law enforcement officer may issue a field release citation under 
CCP 14.06 instead of custody for a traffic or fine only offense
 (i) A law enforcement officer may issue a field release citation under CCP 14.06 instead 
of custody for PC 49.02, Public Intoxication, ONLY if released to a parent, guardian, 
custodian, or other responsible adult.
 CCP 45A.454 CHILDREN TAKEN INTO CUSTODY 
(offenses on school property/vehicles)
 (b) If an officer issues a citation or files a CCP 45A.101(g) complaint for a 12 or older 
child for an offense on school property/vehicles, the officer shall submit to the court:
  the offense report and if any, statements from witnesses or victims
 (c) An attorney representing the state may not proceed in a trial unless the law 
enforcement officer complied with the requirements of this subsection.
 (d) Law enforcement officers may not issue a citation or file a complaint on a child 
under 12 years if the offense occurred on school property/vehicles owned or operated 
by a county or independent school district.
 (2) a child may be held in the nonsecure facility only for the period necessary to 
complete: 
(A) identification; 
(B) investigation; 
(C) processing; 
(D) release to a parent, guardian, custodian, or other responsible adult; or 
(E) the arranging of transportation to the appropriate juvenile court, juvenile 
detention facility, secure detention facility, justice court, or municipal court; 
(3) residential use of the area is prohibited; and 
(4) a law enforcement officer or facility staff person shall provide continuous 
visual supervision of a child while the child is in nonsecure custody. 
(f) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a child may not be 
detained in a place of nonsecure custody for a period of more than six hours. 
(g) A child taken into custody for an offense that a justice or municipal court has 
jurisdiction of under Article 4.11 or 4.14 may be presented or detained in a 
detention facility designated by the juvenile board under Section 52.02(a)(3), 
Family Code, only if: 
(1) the child's case is transferred to the juvenile court by a justice or municipal 
court under Section 51.08(b), Family Code; or 
(2) the child is referred to the juvenile court by a justice or municipal court for 
contempt of court under Article 45A.461. 
(h) Except as provided by Subsection (i) and Section 37.143(a), Education Code, 
for a traffic offense or an offense punishable by fine only, a law enforcement 
officer may issue a citation as provided by Article 14.06 instead of taking a child 
into custody. 
(i) A law enforcement officer may issue a citation as provided by Article 14.06 
instead of taking a child into custody for conduct constituting a violation of 
Section 49.02, Penal Code, only if the officer releases the child to the child's 
parent, guardian, custodian, or other responsible adult. 
45A.454. CONDUCT ALLEGED ON SCHOOL PROPERTY. (a) In this article, "child" 
has the meaning assigned by Article 45A.453(a). 
(b) If a law enforcement officer issues a citation or files a complaint in the 
manner provided by Article 45A.101(g) for conduct by a child 12 years of age or 
older that is alleged to have occurred on school property of or on a vehicle 
owned or operated by a county or independent school district, the officer shall 
submit to the court: 
(1) the offense report; 
(2) a statement by a witness to the alleged conduct; and 
(3) a statement by a victim of the alleged conduct, if any. 
(c) An attorney representing the state may not proceed in a trial of an offense 
unless the law enforcement officer has complied with the requirements of 
Subsection (b). 
(d) Notwithstanding Article 45A.453(h) or (i), a law enforcement officer may not 
issue a citation or file a complaint in the manner provided by Article 45A.101(g) 
for conduct by a child younger than 12 years of age that is alleged to have 
occurred on school property of or on a vehicle owned or operated by a county 
or independent school district. 
How to release a child
 To parent, guardian, custodian, other “responsible” adult if the 
adult promises to bring the child to juvenile court
 For Class C and Transportation Code, Citation 
Juvenile detention or magistrate for Delinquent Conduct if Taken 
into Custody 
Civil vs. Criminal Incidents 
regarding child custody
 o Many custody disputes are civil and officers can only intervene if:
 It is apparent that a crime is about to or is taking place; or
 If the child/juvenile is in apparent immediate danger
 o Consider if a crime regarding child custody has been committed:
 Interference with Child Custody/Rights of Guardian, or Enticing A Child
 Agreeing to Abduct a Child from Custody or Harboring Runaway Child
 o Officers must report to CPS (Document CPS report # in your report) when there is 
cause for concern for a child’s health or safety, involving a caretaker type, even if: 
Clear offense elements are not met
 It does NOT justify taking possession of a child in an emergency.
 Role and authority of CPS at a scene
  CPS does NOT have greater authority to enter a premise without a warrant 
 CPS calls for a LE assist to go talk to a child at a house. What if the no one 
answers the door? 
 Can LE go in with CPS?  
 Do you have PC and an exigency? 
 Consent?
 Releasing a child 
• To parent, guardian, custodian, other “responsible” adult if the adult 
promises to bring the child to juvenile court 
• Juvenile detention or magistrate for Delinquent Conduct if Taken into 
Custody  
• For Class C and Transportation Code, Citation 
Civil vs. Criminal Incidents regarding child custody  
• Many custody disputes are civil and in many cases:  
o Officers can only intervene if:  
It is apparent that a crime is about to or is taking place; or  
If the child/juvenile is in apparent immediate danger  
o Consider if a crime regarding child custody has been committed: Penal 
Code Chapter 25.03 Interference with Child Custody  
Penal Code Chapter 25.031 Agreeing to Abduct a Child from Custody  
Penal Code Chapter 25.04 Enticing A Child  
Penal Code Chapter 25.06 Harboring Runaway Child  
Penal Code Chapter 25.10 Interference with Rights of Guardian of the 
Person  
o An officer must call CPS to file a report and document the CPS report number 
in an incident report when there is cause for concern for the child’s health or 
safety (Family Code Chapter 261.101) even when the circumstance dose not:  
Meet the elements of any criminal offense.  
Justify taking possession of the child in an emergency.  
o Role and authority of CPS at a scene  
CPS does not have any greater authority, without a court order in hand, to 
enter a premise than LE.  
Scenario – CPS calls for a LE assist to go talk to a child at a house. What if 
the no one answers the door? Can LE go in with CPS? If there isn’t a court 
order, specifically about entry and taking emergency custody, probably not. 
Caution LE not to forget all that they have learned about legal entry into a 
house.  
51.09. WAIVER OF RIGHTS
 Unless contrary to law or this title, may be waived in proceedings under this title if:
 (1) the waiver is made by the child and the attorney for the child;
 (2) the child and attorney are informed of and understand the right and the possible 
consequences of waiving it;
 (3) the waiver is voluntary; and
 (4) the waiver is made in writing or in court proceedings that are recorded.
 Juvenile Interviews and Interrogation
 • School administration: Hindering Apprehension or Prosecution / Interference with 
Public Duties
 • Non-Custodial Interview: Officers do NOT have to contact a parent/guardian beforehand
 School is the preferred time/location to do a non-custodial follow-up interview
 Contact the school administrators or ISD Police to set up a time and location, 
locate the juvenile, and bring them to you.
 51.095. ADMISSIBILITY OF A 
STATEMENT OF A CHILD
  FC 51.095 only applies to a child in custody or subjected to custodial interrogation
  If a child isn’t in “custody”, an Officer can interview and take statements without 
needing Magistrate Miranda Warnings
  Other wise the issue becomes “Voluntariness” & totality of the circumstances such as 
the child’s age, maturity, experience, background, intelligence and education.
  Think consensual: talk with a child at school and allow them to go back to class. 
 Talk with them outside a crime scene and allowing them to leave.
 51.095. ADMISSIBILITY OF A 
STATEMENT OF A CHILD
  Courts have consistently held that a Child is NOT in custody when:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 notified that (s)he is NOT in custody and
 is notified that he/she is free to leave at any time and
  Do not take custody after an interview
 is allowed to leave after the taking of a statement (written or audio/video)
 ▪ Let them go back to class to keep it “non-custodial”
 ▪ Remember to audio/video interviews with bodycam, recorder, etc.
 33.4. Identify the legal requirements pertaining to a waiver of rights and 
requirements for admissibility of statements given by Family Code 51.09 and 
Family Code Chapter 51.095.  
Legal requirements for waiver of rights and admissibility: Waiver of rights – 
Family Code Chapter 51.09.  Unless a contrary intent clearly appears elsewhere, 
any right granted to a child by Title 3, the constitution or the laws of Texas or 
U.S. may be waived IF:  
o Waiver is made by child and attorney for the child  
o Child and attorney waiving the right are informed of and understand the right 
& possible consequence of waiving it  
o It’s Voluntary, and  
o Made in writing or in court proceedings that are recorded 
Juvenile Interviews and Interrogation  
• School administration:  Penal Code Chapter 38.05 Hindering Apprehension or 
Prosecution/38.15 Interference with Public Duties  
• Non-Custodial Interview  
o An officer does not have to contact a parent/legal guardian prior to 
conducting a non-custodial interview.  
o Preferred Location – School  
The preferred time/location to do a non-custodial follow-up interview 
with a juvenile is while that juvenile is at school.  
Contact the school administrators or ISD Police to:  
Set up a time and location.  
Locate the juvenile and bring them to the location for the interview.  
Do not arrest the juvenile after the interview, allow the juvenile to go back 
to class.  
For this to remain “non-custodial”, remember the juvenile must be 
allowed to leave regardless of what they tell you.  
Remember to audio/video a non-custodial interview.  
If the child isn’t in custody and is not being interrogated, then FC 51.095 and 
previous court rulings look to “Voluntariness”. Courts will look at the totality of 
the circumstance including the child’s age, maturity, experience, background, 
intelligence and education.  
• If a child isn’t in “custody”, an Officer can interview and take statements from 
a child without needing a Magistrate. Think a consensual encounter – like 
talking with a child at school and allowing them to go back to class. Talking with 
them outside a crime scene and allowing them to leave.  
Courts have consistently held that a Child is NOT in custody when: 
• notified that (s)he is NOT in custody and 
• is notified that he/she is free to leave at any time and 
• is allowed to leave after the taking of a statement (written or audio/video) 
Do not take custody after an interview 
• Let them go back to class to keep it “non-custodial” 
• Remember to audio/video interviews with bodycam, recorder, etc. 
51.095. ADMISSIBILITY OF A STATEMENT OF 
A CHILD: CUSTODIAL WRITTEN
  AFTER being given magistrate warnings by a Magistrate (Miranda warning a Judge)
  Written statement is then obtained by the officer 
 THEN signed with no law enforcement officer present, in the presence of the Magistrate.
 o Judge must be fully convinced that the child understands the nature & contents & is signing voluntarily
 o Child knowingly, intelligently, & voluntarily waives rights before & during & signs it in their presence
 o Magistrate certifies that (s)he has examined the child independently from law enforcement or 
prosecutor and determined that child understands the nature of the statement.
 51.095. ADMISSIBILITY OF A STATEMENT OF 
A CHILD: Audio/Video Statements
  Same Magistrate warnings for written statements BUT MUST be a part of the recording 
 Child must waive each right stated in warning on the recording.
  Each voice/person must be identified.
  Defense attorney is entitled to a copy not later than 20th day before the proceeding, 
In other words…
  Magistrated Statements (Juvenile Confessions 
without an Attorney Waiving Rights)
 •Juvenile Taken into Custody 
•Juvenile transported to Juvenile Detention Facility 
•Juvenile read Miranda Warning
 •Juvenile must be taken to a magistrate who warns 
juvenile again (police officer not allowed to be 
present, unless)
 •Officer then takes Juvenile’s statement
 •Juvenile taken back to the magistrate who warns 
juvenile AGAIN, juvenile must sign statement in front of 
the magistrate
 51.095. ADMISSIBILITY OF A STATEMENT OF 
A CHILD: ORAL STATEMENTS
  It the facts/circumstances are found to be true & tend to establish the child’s guilt
 ▪ finding of secreted or stolen property, or 
▪ instrument used to commit the offense
  Res Gestae of the Delinquent or Conduct indicating a need for supervision.
  Made in open court at the adjudication hearing, Grand jury, or preliminary hearing.
 Admissibility of a statement of a child – Family Code Chapter 51.095 statements 
by a child are admissible in future proceedings if:  
For WRITTEN statements:  
o Written Statement was given AFTER being given magistrate warnings by a 
Magistrate (think Miranda warning – but they must be given by a Judge, not an 
officer)  
o That written statement is signed in the presence of the Magistrate, with no 
law enforcement officer present.  
o The magistrate is fully convinced that the child understands the nature & 
contents of the statement & is signing voluntarily.  
o The child knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waives the rights before & 
during making of the statement and signs in presence of the Magistrate.  
o Magistrate certifies that the magistrate has examined the child independently 
from law enforcement or prosecutor and determined that child understands 
the nature of the statement.  
For Audio/Video Statements:  
o Magistrate warnings (same as for written) BUT the warnings MUST be a part 
of the recording and the child must waive each right stated in warning on the 
recording.  
o Each voice/person must be identified.  
o And not later than 20th day before the date of the proceeding, the defense 
attorney is entitled to a copy of this recording.  
For ORAL statements:  
o Statements made orally and the statement is of facts or circumstances that 
are found to be true & tend to establish the child’s guilt, such as finding of 
secreted or stolen property, or the instrument with which the child states the 
offense was committed.  
o Res Gestae statement of the Delinquent conduct or Conduct indicating a need 
for supervision.  
o Statement made in open court at child’s adjudication hearing or before a 
Grand jury considering a petition or in a preliminary hearing.  
Other important considerations for 
juvenile statements
  Juvenile Justice Code has jurisdiction until a person is 18, but a person is an adult at 17 
 Officers must consider carefully when an offense occurred, what type of offense it 
was, and how old the person is when they wish to speak/interview them.
 If crime occurs after 17 – follow adult rules
 If the crime was before being 17, but not yet 18, then juvenile rules apply.
 If the crime was before being 17, but now over 18, adult rules apply (CCP 38.22 & 2.32), 
but the crime would, initially, be handled by juvenile probation/prosecutors
 If a suspect’s age is in question & could be a juvenile, it’s safer to follow juvenile rules 
because they will satisfy the adult rules but not vice versa
 CCP 2.32 - Statements that MUST be 
recorded
  Officers must electronically record adult suspect statements/interviews in these cases: 
Murder/Capital Murder
 Kidnapping/Aggravated Kidnapping
 Trafficking/Continuous Trafficking
 Sexual Assault/Aggravated Sexual Assault
 Continuous Sexual Assault of a child
 Sexual Performance of a Child
 Indecency of a Child
 Improper Educator/Student relationship
 Written statements vs. Audio/Video 
Magistrated Statements
  Become aware and pay attention to the forms that your jurisdiction uses. 
 Both will require a Magistrate’s review & certification process for voluntariness 
 There are Pros and Cons for both:
 ❑ Video/audio: Texas Courts have ruled it must be one “continuous” file with the Magistrate 
warnings and questioning of the child. 
❑ Audio/video interview device cannot be turned off – it must continue to run. 
❑ Language barriers: audio/video will show & allow defense to hear & employ an interpreter
 ❑ Written:  handwriting is difficult to read, and most don’t put much detail in them
 Important considerations for juvenile statements – the Juvenile Justice Code 
has jurisdiction until a person is 18 years of age. However, in Texas, a person 
becomes an “adult” at 17 years of age. Therefore, there exists a gray area 
where Officers must consider carefully when an offense occurred, what type of 
offense it was, and how old the person is when they wish to speak/interview 
them.  
If crime occurs after 17 – all the rules will follow adult rules  
If the crime occurred when person was under 17, but not yet 18, then juvenile 
rules apply.  
If crime occurred when person was under 17, but they are over 18, adult rules 
apply meaning Officers must follow CCP 38.22 and CCP 2.32  
If a suspect’s age can’t be accurately determined and a possibility exists that 
the suspect is a juvenile, it’s safer to conduct interrogation pursuant to juvenile 
procedures as compliance with those will satisfy CCP 38.22, but not vice versa 
(if you went with adult procedures and they turned out to be adult).  
In situations where the offense was committed while the person was a juvenile 
(under 17), but they are now 18 or older, Officers must remember that adult 
rules will apply, but the crime would, at least initially, be handled by juvenile 
probation and prosecutors that work with juvenile cases.  
CCP 2.32 - Statements that MUST be recorded – Officers must always 
electronically records statements/interviews of suspects in the following adult 
case types:  
Murder/Capital Murder  
Kidnapping/Aggravated Kidnapping  
Trafficking/Continuous Trafficking  
Sexual Assault/Aggravated Sexual Assault  
Continuous Sexual Assault of a child  
Sexual Performance of a Child  
Indecency of a Child  
Improper Educator/Student relationship  
o Written statements vs. Audio/Video statements (Magistrated) – pay careful 
attention to the forms that the jurisdiction uses. Both types of statements may 
require the juvenile to be brought back before the Magistrate to ensure 
voluntariness before certification of the statement by the Magistrate. That 
includes video! Officers must allow Magistrate to review, if requested or the 
statement may be deemed inadmissible. Pros and cons to both are listed 
below: Texas Courts have held that video/audio files must be one 
“continuous” file containing the Magistrated warnings and the questioning of 
the child. This means that the Magistrated warnings should be recorded and if 
doing an audio/video interview, the device cannot be turned off – it must 
continue to run. This could prove difficult in some jurisdictions.  
Written statements – handwriting is difficult to read and most don’t put as 
much detain within a handwritten statement.  
Language barriers – audio/video will show and allow defense to hear and 
perhaps employ their own interpreter.  
51.11.  GUARDIAN AD LITEM
  (a)(1) Dual-system child: any time before being 18, referred to the juvenile system, and 
involved in the child welfare system by being:
 (A) placed in the temporary/permanent managing conservatorship of DFPS;
 (B) subject of a family-based safety services case with DFPS;
 (C) alleged abuse/neglect victim in an active DFPS-CPS division investigative case; or
 (D) victim in a DFPS case investigation concluding that abuse or neglect occurred.
  (2) Dual-status child = dual-system child, involved with child welfare & juvenile justice systems 
at the same time.
 51.11.  GUARDIAN AD LITEM
 (a-1) If a child appears before the juvenile court without a parent/guardian, the court shall 
appoint a guardian ad litem to protect the interests of the child.  
(b) If it appears to the court that the parent/guardian is incapable/unwilling to make best 
interest decisions for a child, the court may appoint a guardian ad litem for the child
 (c) A child’s attorney may also be his guardian ad litem, but a LE/probation officer or other 
juvenile court employee may NOT be
 (d) Juvenile court may appoint a guardian ad litem under 107 for a suit affecting the parent
child relationship filed by DFPS for the child in the proceeding
 (e) A non-attorney guardian ad litem in a case involving a dual-system child may not:
 (1) investigate any charges involving a dual-status child with the juvenile court; or
 (2) offer testimony concerning the guilt or innocence of a dual-status child.
 51.13.  EFFECT OF ADJUDICATION OR 
DISPOSITION
 •  Order of Adjudication or disposition is NOT a conviction of a crime
 •  No civil disability/disqualification in any civil service application/ appointment
 •  Can only use disposition when:
 o When still a juvenile and child is a party to new offenses 
o Civil Commitment under Health and Safety Code Chapter 841
 51.11. GUARDIAN AD LITEM. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Dual-system child" means a child who, at any time before the child's 18th 
birthday, was referred to the juvenile justice system and was involved in the 
child welfare system by being: 
(A) placed in the temporary or permanent managing conservatorship of the 
Department of Family and Protective Services; 
(B) the subject of a family-based safety services case with the Department of 
Family and Protective Services; 
(C) an alleged victim of abuse or neglect in an active case being investigated by 
the Department of Family and Protective Services child protective 
investigations division; or 
(D) a victim in a case in which the Department of Family and Protective Services 
investigation concluded that there was a reason to believe that abuse or 
neglect occurred. 
(2) "Dual-status child" means a dual-system child who is involved with both the 
child welfare and juvenile justice systems at the same time. 
(a-1) If a child appears before the juvenile court without a parent or guardian, 
the court shall appoint a guardian ad litem to protect the interests of the child. 
The juvenile court need not appoint a guardian ad litem if a parent or guardian 
appears with the child. 
(b) In any case in which it appears to the juvenile court that the child's parent 
or guardian is incapable or unwilling to make decisions in the best interest of 
the child with respect to proceedings under this title, the court may appoint a 
guardian ad litem to protect the interests of the child in the proceedings. 
(c) An attorney for a child may also be his guardian ad litem. A law-enforcement 
officer, probation officer, or other employee of the juvenile court may not be 
appointed guardian ad litem. 
(d) The juvenile court may appoint the guardian ad litem appointed under 
Chapter 107 for a child in a suit affecting the parent-child relationship filed by 
the Department of Family and Protective Services to serve as the guardian ad 
litem for the child in a proceeding held under this title. 
(e) A non-attorney guardian ad litem in a case involving a dual-system child may 
not: 
(1) investigate any charges involving a dual-status child that are pending with 
the juvenile court; or 
(2) offer testimony concerning the guilt or innocence of a dual-status child. 
Adjudication or Disposition – Family Code Chapter 51.13  
• Order of Adjudication or disposition in NOT a conviction of a crime  
• No civil disability or disqualification in any civil service application or 
appointment  
• Can only use disposition when:  
o When still a juvenile and child is a party to new stuff  
o Civil Commitment under Health and Safety Code Chapter 841  
51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF DETENTION
 (a) Except for (h), a child may be detained only in a:
 (1) juvenile processing office under 52.025;
 (2) place of nonsecure custody under CCP 45.058;
 (3) certified juvenile detention facility that complies with (f);
 (4) secure detention facility as provided by j);
 (5) county jail or other facility as provided by (l); or
 (6) nonsecure correctional facility as provided by (j-1).
 (h) This section does not apply to a person:
 (1) transferred to criminal court for prosecution under 54.02 and is at least 17; or
 (2) who is at least 17 and has been taken into custody after having:
 (A) escaped from a juvenile facility for the TJJD; or
 (B) violated a release condition under supervision of the TJJD
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF DETENTION
 (b) Each county shall provide suitable detention places, pending their proceedings, 
▪ but the juvenile board shall control the detention conditions, terms, and supervision; and
 ▪ shall permit reasonable visitation times with the child
 (b-1) A pre-adjudication secure detention facility may be operated only by:
 (1) governmental unit in this state under Civil Practice & Remedies Code101.001; or
 (2) a private entity under a contract with a governmental unit in this state.
 (e) If there is no certified place of detention in the county in which the petition is filed, 
the designated place of detention may be in another county.
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF DETENTION
 (j-1) After custody, a child may be detained in a nonsecure correctional facility until the 
child is released or a detention hearing is held under Section 54.01(a), if:
 (1) the nonsecure correctional facility has been appropriately registered & certified;
 (2) a certified secure detention facility is not available in the county in which the 
child is taken into custody;
 (3) the nonsecure correctional facility complies with the short-term detention 
standards adopted by the Texas Juvenile Justice Department; and
 (4) the nonsecure correctional facility has been designated by the county juvenile 
board for the county in which the facility is located.
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF DETENTION
 (f) A child detained in a building that contains a jail, lockup, or other place of secure 
confinement, including an alcohol or other drug treatment facility, shall be:
  separated by sight and sound from adults detained in the same building, which occurs 
only if they are unable to see each other and conversation between them is not possible. 
 Separation must be in all areas: sally ports, passageways, admission, counseling, sleeping, 
toileting, showering, dining, recreational, educational, vocational, and health care areas. 
 Separation may be accomplished through architectural design. 
 If under 17 & have been transferred for criminal prosecution under 54.02, (s)he considered 
a child for the purposes of this subsection.
 51.12. PLACE AND CONDITIONS OF DETENTION. (a) Except as provided by 
Subsection (h), a child may be detained only in a: 
(1) juvenile processing office in compliance with Section 52.025; 
(2) place of nonsecure custody in compliance with Article 45A.453, Code of 
Criminal Procedure; 
(3) certified juvenile detention facility that complies with the requirements of 
Subsection (f); 
(4) secure detention facility as provided by Subsection (j); 
(5) county jail or other facility as provided by Subsection (l); or 
(6) nonsecure correctional facility as provided by Subsection (j-1). 
(h) This section does not apply to a person: 
(1) who has been transferred to criminal court for prosecution under Section 
54.02 and is at least 17 years of age; or 
(2) who is at least 17 years of age and who has been taken into custody after 
having: 
(A) escaped from a juvenile facility operated by or under contract with the 
Texas Juvenile Justice Department; or 
(B) violated a condition of release under supervision of the department. 
(b) The proper authorities in each county shall provide a suitable place of 
detention for children who are parties to proceedings under this title, but the 
juvenile board shall control the conditions and terms of detention and 
detention supervision and shall permit visitation with the child at all reasonable 
t
 imes. 
(b-1) A pre-adjudication secure detention facility may be operated only by: 
(1) a governmental unit in this state as defined by Section 101.001, Civil 
Practice and Remedies Code; or 
(2) a private entity under a contract with a governmental unit in this state. 
(e) If there is no certified place of detention in the county in which the petition 
is filed, the designated place of detention may be in another county. 
(j-1) After being taken into custody, a child may be detained in a nonsecure 
correctional facility until the child is released under Section 53.01, 53.012, or 
53.02 or until a detention hearing is held under Section 54.01(a), if: 
(1) the nonsecure correctional facility has been appropriately registered and 
certified; 
(2) a certified secure detention facility is not available in the county in which 
the child is taken into custody; 
(3) the nonsecure correctional facility complies with the short-term detention 
standards adopted by the Texas Juvenile Justice Department; and 
(4) the nonsecure correctional facility has been designated by the county 
juvenile board for the county in which the facility is located. 
(f) A child detained in a building that contains a jail, lockup, or other place of 
secure confinement, including an alcohol or other drug treatment facility, shall 
be separated by sight and sound from adults detained in the same building. 
Children and adults are separated by sight and sound only if they are unable to 
see each other and conversation between them is not possible. The separation 
must extend to all areas of the facility, including sally ports and passageways, 
and those areas used for admission, counseling, sleeping, toileting, showering, 
dining, recreational, educational, or vocational activities, and health care. The 
separation may be accomplished through architectural design. A person who 
has been transferred for prosecution in criminal court under Section 54.02 and 
is under 17 years of age is considered a child for the purposes of this 
subsection. 
In other words: 
 Juveniles who are detained and brought to a 
juvenile processing center must be:
  Separated, by sight and sound, from adult 
inmates/arrestees
 Sight
 &
 Sound
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (c) Juvenile Court Judges in each county & a juvenile board majority shall, at least 
annually, inspect all county public/private preadjudication secure detention facilities & 
 shall certify in writing (suitable/unsuitable) to operating & financial authorities & TJJD; 
 For suitable or unsuitable determinations, the judges and members shall consider:
 1) current monitoring & inspection reports & any noncompliance citation reports from the 
dept., including the (c-1) report & the status of any required corrective actions;
 2) current gov’t inspector certification for compliance with local fire codes;
 3) current building inspector certification for compliance with local building codes; 
4) Abuse, neglect, or exploitation allegation #s reported by the facility for 12-months prior & 
investigative summaries from the facility, local LE, & the department;
 5) availability of health and mental health services provided to facility residents;
 6) availability of educational services provided to facility residents; and
 7) overall appearance & the facility’s security, maintenance, cleanliness, & environment
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (c-1) TJJD shall inspect each pre-adjudication secure detention facility. The dept shall provide a 
report to each juvenile county judge indicating, suitable/unsuitable in accordance with:
 (1)  the requirements of Subsections (a), (f), and (g); and
 (2)  minimum detention professional standards promulgated by the dept, election of the 
county juvenile board, or current standards by the American Correctional Association.
 facility under (b-1) in this state shall:
 (d) Except for (j) & (l), a child may not be placed in a facility that has not been certified suitable 
under (c) & registered under (i), & if detained in one, shall be entitled to immediate release
 (i) Except for a facility under (l), a gov’t/private juvenile pre-adjudication secure detention 
(1) register the facility annually with the TJJD; and
 (2) adhere to all applicable minimum standards for the facility.
 (c) In each county, each judge of the juvenile court and a majority of the 
members of the juvenile board shall personally inspect all public or private 
juvenile pre-adjudication secure detention facilities that are located in the 
county at least annually and shall certify in writing to the authorities 
responsible for operating and giving financial support to the facilities and to the 
Texas Juvenile Justice Department that the facilities are suitable or unsuitable 
for the detention of children. In determining whether a facility is suitable or 
unsuitable for the detention of children, the juvenile court judges and juvenile 
board members shall consider: 
(1) current monitoring and inspection reports and any noncompliance citation 
reports issued by the department, including the report provided under 
Subsection (c-1), and the status of any required corrective actions; 
(2) current governmental inspector certification regarding the facility's 
compliance with local fire codes; 
(3) current building inspector certification regarding the facility's compliance 
with local building codes; 
(4) for the 12-month period preceding the inspection, the total number of 
allegations of abuse, neglect, or exploitation reported by the facility and a 
summary of the findings of any investigations of abuse, neglect, or exploitation 
conducted by the facility, a local law enforcement agency, and the department; 
(5) the availability of health and mental health services provided to facility 
residents; 
(6) the availability of educational services provided to facility residents; and 
(7) the overall physical appearance of the facility, including the facility's 
security, maintenance, cleanliness, and environment. 
(c-1) The Texas Juvenile Justice Department shall inspect each public or private 
juvenile pre-adjudication secure detention facility. The department shall 
provide a report to each juvenile court judge presiding in the same county as an 
inspected facility indicating whether the facility is suitable or unsuitable for the 
detention of children in accordance with: 
(1) the requirements of Subsections (a), (f), and (g); and 
(2) minimum professional standards for the detention of children in pre
adjudication secure confinement promulgated by the department or, at the 
election of the juvenile board of the county in which the facility is located, the 
current standards promulgated by the American Correctional Association. 
(d) Except as provided by Subsections (j) and (l), a child may not be placed in a 
facility that has not been certified under Subsection (c) as suitable for the 
detention of children and registered under Subsection (i). Except as provided by 
Subsections (j) and (l), a child detained in a facility that has not been certified 
under Subsection (c) as suitable for the detention of children or that has not 
been registered under Subsection (i) shall be entitled to immediate release 
from custody in that facility. 
(i) Except for a facility as provided by Subsection (l), a governmental unit or 
private entity that operates or contracts for the operation of a juvenile pre
adjudication secure detention facility under Subsection (b-1) in this state shall: 
(1) register the facility annually with the Texas Juvenile Justice Department; and 
(2) adhere to all applicable minimum standards for the facility. 
51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (m) The TJJD may deny, suspend, or revoke the registration of any facility required to 
register under Subsection (i) if the facility fails to:
 (1) adhere to all applicable minimum standards for the facility; or
 (2) timely correct any notice of noncompliance with minimum standards.
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (j) After being in custody, a child may be detained in a secure detention facility until 
released or a detention hearing is held regardless of the facility being certified, if:
 (1) a certified juvenile detention facility is not available in the county of the custody;
 (2) the detention facility complies with:
 (A) the short-term detention standards adopted by TJJD; and
 (B) the requirements of Subsection (f); and
 (3) the detention facility has been designated by its county’s juvenile board
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (l) A child in custody & the detention is required in 53.02(f) may be detained in a county jail or 
other facility until released or a detention hearing, regardless of facility compliances here, if:
 (1) a certified juvenile detention/secure detention facility under (j) is not available in the county 
or an adjacent county;
 (2) the facility has been designated by the county juvenile board;
 (3) the child is separated by sight and sound from detained adults in the same facility through 
architectural design or time-phasing;
 (4) child does not have contact w/ the adult management/direct-care staff on the same shift;
 (5) County of custody is not located in a metropolitan statistical area (US Census Bureau); and 
(6) Judges of the juvenile court & a majority of juvenile board members for the custody county 
have personally inspected it annually & certified its compliance of (3&4) in writing to TJJD
 (m) The Texas Juvenile Justice Department may deny, suspend, or revoke the 
registration of any facility required to register under Subsection (i) if the facility 
fails to: 
(1) adhere to all applicable minimum standards for the facility; or 
(2) timely correct any notice of noncompliance with minimum standards. 
(j) After being taken into custody, a child may be detained in a secure detention 
facility until the child is released under Section 53.01, 53.012, or 53.02 or until a 
detention hearing is held under Section 54.01(a), regardless of whether the 
facility has been certified under Subsection (c), if: 
(1) a certified juvenile detention facility is not available in the county in which 
the child is taken into custody; 
(2) the detention facility complies with: 
(A) the short-term detention standards adopted by the Texas Juvenile Justice 
Department; and 
(B) the requirements of Subsection (f); and 
(3) the detention facility has been designated by the county juvenile board for 
the county in which the facility is located. 
(l) A child who is taken into custody and required to be detained under Section 
53.02(f) may be detained in a county jail or other facility until the child is 
released under Section 53.02(f) or until a detention hearing is held as required 
by Section 54.01(p), regardless of whether the facility complies with the 
requirements of this section, if: 
(1) a certified juvenile detention facility or a secure detention facility described 
by Subsection (j) is not available in the county in which the child is taken into 
custody or in an adjacent county; 
(2) the facility has been designated by the county juvenile board for the county 
in which the facility is located; 
(3) the child is separated by sight and sound from adults detained in the same 
facility through architectural design or time-phasing; 
(4) the child does not have any contact with management or direct-care staff 
that has contact with adults detained in the same facility on the same work 
shift; 
(5) the county in which the child is taken into custody is not located in a 
metropolitan statistical area as designated by the United States Bureau of the 
Census; and 
(6) each judge of the juvenile court and a majority of the members of the 
juvenile board of the county in which the child is taken into custody have 
personally inspected the facility at least annually and have certified in writing to 
the Texas Juvenile Justice Department that the facility complies with the 
requirements of Subdivisions (3) and (4). 
51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (k) If a child who is detained under (j) or (l) is not released from detention at the end of 
the detention hearing for a reason in 54.01(e), the child may be detained after only in 
a certified juvenile detention facility.
 51.12. PLACE & CONDITIONS OF 
DETENTION
 (g) Except for a juvenile processing office, nonsecure custody place, secure detention 
facility under (j), or a facility under (l), a child detained in a jail/lockup building may not 
have any contact with:
 (1) part-time or full-time security staff, including management, who have contact with adults 
detained in the same building; or
 (2) direct-care staff who have contact with adults detained in the same building.
 52.025. DESIGNATION OF JUVENILE 
PROCESSING OFFICE
 (a) Juvenile board may designate an office/room, which may be in a LE agency as the 
juvenile processing office for the temporary detention of a child taken into custody
  The office may not be a cell or holding facility used for other detentions 
 Juvenile board may prescribe by written order the conditions of the designation and limit 
the activities that may occur in the office during the temporary detention.
 (c) A child may not be left unattended in a juvenile processing office and is entitled to 
be accompanied by a parent, guardian, other custodian, or the child's attorney.
 (d) A child may not be detained in a juvenile processing office for longer than six hours.
 52.025. DESIGNATION OF JUVENILE 
PROCESSING OFFICE
 (b) A child may be detained in a juvenile processing office only for:
 (1) the return of the child to the custody of a person under Section 52.02(a)(1) (parent, 
guardian, custodian, with promise to bring to court);
 (2) the completion of essential forms and records required by the juvenile court or this title;
 (3) the photographing and fingerprinting of the child if otherwise authorized at the time of 
temporary detention by this title;
 (4) the issuance of warnings to the child as required or permitted by this title; or
 (5) the receipt of a statement by the child under Section 51.095(a)(1), (2), (3), or (5).
 (k) If a child who is detained under Subsection (j) or (l) is not released from 
detention at the conclusion of the detention hearing for a reason stated in 
Section 54.01(e), the child may be detained after the hearing only in a certified 
juvenile detention facility. 
(g) Except for a child detained in a juvenile processing office, a place of 
nonsecure custody, a secure detention facility as provided by Subsection (j), or 
a facility as provided by Subsection (l), a child detained in a building that 
contains a jail or lockup may not have any contact with: 
(1) part-time or full-time security staff, including management, who have 
contact with adults detained in the same building; or 
(2) direct-care staff who have contact with adults detained in the same 
building. 
52.025. DESIGNATION OF JUVENILE PROCESSING OFFICE. (a) The juvenile board 
may designate an office or a room, which may be located in a police facility or 
sheriff's offices, as the juvenile processing office for the temporary detention of 
a child taken into custody under Section 52.01. The office may not be a cell or 
holding facility used for detentions other than detentions under this section. 
The juvenile board by written order may prescribe the conditions of the 
designation and limit the activities that may occur in the office during the 
temporary detention. 
(c) A child may not be left unattended in a juvenile processing office and is 
entitled to be accompanied by the child's parent, guardian, or other custodian 
or by the child's attorney. 
(d) A child may not be detained in a juvenile processing office for longer than 
six hours. 
(b) A child may be detained in a juvenile processing office only for: 
(1) the return of the child to the custody of a person under Section 52.02(a)(1); 
(2) the completion of essential forms and records required by the juvenile court 
or this title; 
(3) the photographing and fingerprinting of the child if otherwise authorized at 
the time of temporary detention by this title; 
(4) the issuance of warnings to the child as required or permitted by this title; 
or 
(5) the receipt of a statement by the child under Section 51.095(a)(1), (2), (3), 
or (5). 
52.026. RESPONSIBILITY FOR 
TRANSPORTING JUVENILE OFFENDERS
 (a) LE officers taking a child into custody shall transport them to an appropriate 
detention facility/school campus if not released to the parent, guardian, or custodian 
(b) If the juvenile detention facility is outside the county of custody, the LE officer with 
custody or county sheriff, if authorized by the commissioners court, shall transport unless: 
(1) The child is detained in a secure detention facility under 51.12(j); or
 (2) released to the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child.
 (c) Upon an order by the juvenile board that is approved by vote of the commissioner’s 
court, it shall be the duty of the custody’s county sheriff to transport to & from all 
scheduled juvenile court proceedings, appearances, and other court ordered activities
 58.001. COLLECTION OF RECORDS OF 
CHILDREN
 o Law enforcement shall forward info (reports and fingerprints/photographs) relating to child’s 
custody, if referred to Juvenile on or before the 10th calendar day after the custody date 
o includes weekends and holidays (10 calendar days)
 o If that doesn’t happen, law enforcement shall destroy all info including the fingerprints, 
photos and reports and case won’t proceed forward.
 58.002. PHOTOGRAPHS AND 
FINGERPRINTS OF CHILDREN
 (a) Except for CCP 63, a child may not be photographed/fingerprinted without the 
juvenile court consent unless the child is:
 (1)  taken into custody; or
 (2)  referred to the juvenile court for felony conduct or a misdemeanor punishable by 
confinement, regardless of being in custody or not.
 (b)  On/before 12/31 of each year, each LE agency head shall certify to the juvenile 
board that the photos & fingerprints required to be destroyed under 58.001 have been 
 The juvenile board may conduct or cause to be an audit of their records to verify the 
destruction and the agency shall make its records available for this purpose.  
 If the audit shows that the certification provided is false, that person is subject to 
prosecution for perjury under PC CH. 37
 52.026. RESPONSIBILITY FOR TRANSPORTING JUVENILE OFFENDERS. (a) It shall 
be the duty of the law enforcement officer who has taken a child into custody 
to transport the child to the appropriate detention facility or to the school 
campus to which the child is assigned as provided by Section 52.02(a)(7) if the 
child is not released to the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child. 
(b) If the juvenile detention facility is located outside the county in which the 
child is taken into custody, it shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer 
who has taken the child into custody or, if authorized by the commissioners 
court of the county, the sheriff of that county to transport the child to the 
appropriate juvenile detention facility unless the child is: 
(1) detained in a secure detention facility under Section 51.12(j); or 
(2) released to the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child. 
(c) On adoption of an order by the juvenile board and approval of the juvenile 
board's order by record vote of the commissioners court, it shall be the duty of 
the sheriff of the county in which the child is taken into custody to transport 
the child to and from all scheduled juvenile court proceedings and appearances 
and other activities ordered by the juvenile court. 
33.6. Identify the legal restrictions on fingerprinting and photographing a 
child and administering a polygraph examination.  
Legal restrictions of fingerprinting and photographing a child:  
• Collection of records of children – Family Code Chapter 58.001  
o Law enforcement shall forward information (reports and 
f
 ingerprints/photographs) relating to child taken into custody, if the child is 
referred to Juvenile on or before the 10th calendar day after the date the child 
is taken into custody (this includes weekends and holidays in the 10 days).  
o If that doesn’t happen, law enforcement shall destroy all info including the 
f
 ingerprints, photos and reports and case won’t proceed forward.  
58.002. PHOTOGRAPHS AND FINGERPRINTS OF CHILDREN. (a) Except as 
provided by Chapter 63, Code of Criminal Procedure, a child may not be 
photographed or fingerprinted without the consent of the juvenile court unless 
the child is: 
(1) taken into custody; or 
(2) referred to the juvenile court for conduct that constitutes a felony or a 
misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail, regardless of whether the child 
has been taken into custody. 
(b) On or before December 31 of each year, the head of each municipal or 
county law enforcement agency located in a county shall certify to the juvenile 
board for that county that the photographs and fingerprints required to be 
destroyed under Section 58.001 have been destroyed. The juvenile board may 
conduct or cause to be conducted an audit of the records of the law 
enforcement agency to verify the destruction of the photographs and 
f
 ingerprints and the law enforcement agency shall make its records available 
for this purpose. If the audit shows that the certification provided by the head 
of the law enforcement agency is false, that person is subject to prosecution for 
perjury under Chapter 37, Penal Code. 
58.002. PHOTOGRAPHS AND 
FINGERPRINTS OF CHILDREN
 (c) This does not prohibit a LE officer from photoing/fingerprinting a child, not in custody 
/ referred for a felony/jailable misdemeanor with written parent/guardian consent 
 Consent is not required to photo/fingerprint a child under (a)(1) or (2).
 (d) This does not apply to fingerprints that are required or authorized to be submitted or 
obtained for a DL or ID application 
(e) This does not prohibit a LE officer from fingerprinting/photoing a child under 58.0021.
 58.0021. FINGERPRINTS OR PHOTOGRAPHS 
FOR COMPARISON IN INVESTIGATION
 (a) LE officer may take temporary custody of a child to take the child's fingerprints with:
 (1) PC to believe that the child has engaged in delinquent conduct;
 (2) An investigation into that conduct and has found other fingerprints; and
 (3) PC to believe that the child's fingerprints will match the other fingerprints.
 (b) LE officer may take temporary custody of a child to take the child's photograph if:
 (1) With PC to believe the child has engaged in delinquent conduct; and
 (2) With PC to believe the child's photo will be of material assistance in the investigation
 (c) Temporary custody for the purpose described by Subsection (a) or (b): is not a custody under 
Section 52.01; and may not be reported to the juvenile justice info system
 (c) This section does not prohibit a law enforcement officer from photographing 
or fingerprinting a child who is not in custody or who has not been referred to 
the juvenile court for conduct that constitutes a felony or misdemeanor 
punishable by confinement in jail if the child's parent or guardian voluntarily 
consents in writing to the photographing or fingerprinting of the child. Consent 
of the child's parent or guardian is not required to photograph or fingerprint a 
child described by Subsection (a)(1) or (2). 
(d) This section does not apply to fingerprints that are required or authorized to 
be submitted or obtained for an application for a driver's license or personal 
identification card. 
(e) This section does not prohibit a law enforcement officer from fingerprinting 
or photographing a child as provided by Section 58.0021. 
58.0021. FINGERPRINTS OR PHOTOGRAPHS FOR COMPARISON IN 
INVESTIGATION. (a) A law enforcement officer may take temporary custody of a 
child to take the child's fingerprints if: 
(1) the officer has probable cause to believe that the child has engaged in 
delinquent conduct; 
(2) the officer has investigated that conduct and has found other fingerprints 
during the investigation; and 
(3) the officer has probable cause to believe that the child's fingerprints will 
match the other fingerprints. 
(b) A law enforcement officer may take temporary custody of a child to take the 
child's photograph, or may obtain a photograph of a child from a juvenile 
probation department in possession of a photograph of the child, if: 
(1) the officer has probable cause to believe that the child has engaged in 
delinquent conduct; and 
(2) the officer has probable cause to believe that the child's photograph will be 
of material assistance in the investigation of that conduct. 
(c) Temporary custody for the purpose described by Subsection (a) or (b): 
(1) is not a taking into custody under Section 52.01; and 
(2) may not be reported to the juvenile justice information system under 
Subchapter B. 
58.0021. FINGERPRINTS OR PHOTOGRAPHS 
FOR COMPARISON IN INVESTIGATION
 (d) If the LE officer does not take the child into custody under 52.01, the child shall be released 
from the temporary custody as the fingerprints or photographs are obtained.
 (e) LE officer who obtains these fingerprints or photographs from a child shall:
 (1) immediately destroy them if they do not lead to a positive comparison or identification; and
 (1) a juvenile processing office; or
 (2) make a reasonable effort to notify the child's parent, guardian, or custodian of the action taken.
 (f) A LE officer may obtain these fingerprints or photographs from a child at:
 (2) a location that affords reasonable privacy to the child.
 (d) If a law enforcement officer does not take the child into custody under 
Section 52.01, the child shall be released from temporary custody authorized 
under this section as soon as the fingerprints or photographs are obtained. 
(e) A law enforcement officer who under this section obtains fingerprints or 
photographs from a child shall: 
(1) immediately destroy them if they do not lead to a positive comparison or 
identification; and 
(2) make a reasonable effort to notify the child's parent, guardian, or custodian 
of the action taken. 
(f) A law enforcement officer may under this section obtain fingerprints or 
photographs from a child at: 
(1) a juvenile processing office; or 
(2) a location that affords reasonable privacy to the child. 
58.0022. FINGERPRINTS OR PHOTOGRAPHS TO 
IDENTIFY RUNAWAYS
  LE officer who takes a child into custody with probable cause to believe that the child has 
engaged in CINS – Runaway 51.03(b)(2) and 
 who after reasonable effort is unable to determine the identity of the child, may fingerprint or 
photograph the child to establish the child's identity. 
 On determination of the child's identity or that the child cannot be identified by the fingerprints 
or photographs, the law enforcement officer shall immediately destroy all copies of the 
fingerprint records or photographs of the child.
 So…like…when can I fingerprint a child?
  PCfor Delinquent Conduct, investigated that conduct and found other 
fingerprints, AND have PC to believe the child’s fingerprints will match
  To establish identity for Runaway (CINS), after reasonable effort. 
 May be fingerprinted at Juvenile Processing Office, or a location that 
reasonably affords privacy to the child. 
Um…so…when can I photograph a child?
  Officer has PC to believe child has engaged in Delinquent Conduct AND 
Officer believes child’s photograph will be of material assistance to 
investigation of that conduct. 
 To establish identity for Runaway (CINS), after reasonable effort. 
Caveat Notice
  Images and fingerprints of Juveniles used for the purpose of identifying 
runaways, upon determination of the child’s identity, or inability to identify, 
the officer SHALL destroy all copies of fingerprint or photographs. 
 If there is an offense and the photos or fingerprints help with the offense, 
then they may be retained for evidence
  If there is an offense and don’t help, then they must be destroyed
 51.151.  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION
  If a child is taken into custody under 52.01, a person may not administer a polygraph exam to 
a child without consent from his or her attorney or the juvenile court unless transferred to a 
criminal court under 54.02
 58.0022. FINGERPRINTS OR PHOTOGRAPHS TO IDENTIFY RUNAWAYS. A law 
enforcement officer who takes a child into custody with probable cause to 
believe that the child has engaged in conduct indicating a need for supervision 
as described by Section 51.03(b)(2) and who after reasonable effort is unable to 
determine the identity of the child, may fingerprint or photograph the child to 
establish the child's identity. On determination of the child's identity or that the 
child cannot be identified by the fingerprints or photographs, the law 
enforcement officer shall immediately destroy all copies of the fingerprint 
records or photographs of the child. 
When can you fingerprint a child? 
• PC for Delinquent Conduct, investigated that conduct and found other 
f
 ingerprints, AND have PC to believe the child’s fingerprints will match 
• To establish identity for Runaway (CINS), after reasonable effort.  
• May be fingerprinted at Juvenile Processing Office, or a location that 
reasonably affords privacy to the child.  
When can you photo a child? 
• Officer has PC to believe child has engaged in Delinquent Conduct AND 
Officer believes child’s photograph will be of material assistance to 
investigation of that conduct.  
• To establish identity for Runaway (CINS), after reasonable effort.  
• Images and fingerprints of Juveniles used for the purpose of identifying 
runaways, upon determination of the child’s identity, or inability to identify, 
the officer SHALL destroy all copies of fingerprint or photographs.  
• If there is an offense and the photos or fingerprints help with the offense, 
then they may be retained for evidence 
• If there is an offense and don’t help, then they must be destroyed 
51.151. POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. If a child is taken into custody under 
Section 52.01 of this code, a person may not administer a polygraph 
examination to the child without the consent of the child's attorney or the 
juvenile court unless the child is transferred to criminal court for prosecution 
under Section 54.02 of this code. 
52.02. RELEASE OR DELIVERY TO COURT
 (a) Except as provided by (c), a person taking custody shall, without unnecessary delay 
& 1st taking anywhere, other than a juvenile processing office do one of the following:
 1) Release to a parent/guardian/custodian/other responsible adult upon promise to appear
 2) Take to a designated office/official when there is PC of DC, CINS, or a probation violation;
 3) Take to a detention facility designated by the juvenile board;
 4) Take to a secure detention facility under 51.12(j);
 5) Take to a medical facility for a serious physical condition/illness, requiring prompt treatment;
 6) Dispose of the case under 52.03; or
 7) Take to their school, if a principal, designee, or campus PO agrees to take them for the day;
 (b) Person taking custody shall promptly give notice of the custody & reason to:
 1) the child's parent, guardian, or custodian;  and
 2) the office or official designated by the juvenile board.
 52.02. RELEASE OR DELIVERY TO COURT 
(c) and (d): 
Juveniles and intoxication offenses
  juveniles can be asked for a breath specimen without an attorney, but 
 The request and response must be videotaped and maintained as evidence 
 Requests for blood require consent of attorney or the court; 
 DUI –Minor is a detectable amount of alcohol, 
 DWI is driving with mental and physical faculties impaired.
 • Juveniles can be charged with DWI in the same manner as adults. 
• The adult jail containing the breathalyzer  would have to be shut down while the 
juvenile is being processed inside
 52.02. RELEASE OR DELIVERY TO COURT. (a) Except as provided by Subsection 
(c), a person taking a child into custody, without unnecessary delay and without 
f
 irst taking the child to any place other than a juvenile processing office 
designated under Section 52.025, shall do one of the following: 
(1) release the child to a parent, guardian, custodian of the child, or other 
responsible adult upon that person's promise to bring the child before the 
juvenile court as requested by the court; 
(2) bring the child before the office or official designated by the juvenile board 
if there is probable cause to believe that the child engaged in delinquent 
conduct, conduct indicating a need for supervision, or conduct that violates a 
condition of probation imposed by the juvenile court; 
(3) bring the child to a detention facility designated by the juvenile board; 
(4) bring the child to a secure detention facility as provided by Section 51.12(j); 
(5) bring the child to a medical facility if the child is believed to suffer from a 
serious physical condition or illness that requires prompt treatment; 
(6) dispose of the case under Section 52.03; or 
(7) if school is in session and the child is a student, bring the child to the school 
campus to which the child is assigned if the principal, the principal's designee, 
or a peace officer assigned to the campus agrees to assume responsibility for 
the child for the remainder of the school day. 
(b) A person taking a child into custody shall promptly give notice of the 
person's action and a statement of the reason for taking the child into custody, 
to: 
(1) the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; and 
(2) the office or official designated by the juvenile board. 
(c) A person who takes a child into custody and who has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the child has been operating a motor vehicle in a public place while 
having any detectable amount of alcohol in the child's system may, before 
complying with Subsection (a): 
(1) take the child to a place to obtain a specimen of the child's breath or blood 
as provided by Chapter 724, Transportation Code; and 
(2) perform intoxilyzer processing and videotaping of the child in an adult 
processing office of a law enforcement agency. 
(d) Notwithstanding Section 51.09(a), a child taken into custody as provided by 
Subsection (c) may submit to the taking of a breath specimen or refuse to 
submit to the taking of a breath specimen without the concurrence of an 
attorney, but only if the request made of the child to give the specimen and the 
child's response to that request is videotaped. A videotape made under this 
subsection must be maintained until the disposition of any proceeding against 
the child relating to the arrest is final and be made available to an attorney 
representing the child during that period. 
• FC 52.02 (c) and (d) – juveniles can be asked to provide a breath specimen 
without an attorney, but the request and response must be videotaped and 
maintained as evidence in the case. Requests for blood require consent of 
attorney or the court; therefore, those would be rare.  
• Note: the difference between DUI-Minor and DWI: DUI – Minor is a 
detectable amount of alcohol, while DWI is driving with mental and physical 
faculties impaired. Juveniles can be charged with a crime under the same 
code and in the same manner as adults. The officer’s decision/investigation 
could be the opportunity the juvenile needs for help.  
54.02.  WAIVER OF JURISDICTION AND 
DISCRETIONARY TRANSFER TO CRIMINAL COURT(j)
 (j) Juvenile court may waive its original jurisdiction and transfer a person to the 
appropriate district/criminal district court for criminal proceedings if:
 (1)  the person is 18 years of age or older; or (2)  the person was:
 (A) 10/+ & under 17 at the time of a capital felony or PC 19.02, Murder;
 (B) 14/+ & under 17 for an agg. controlled substance felony or 1st deg felony, not murder;  or
 (C) 15/+ & under 17 for any other felony; 
(3)  no adjudication made/adjudication hearing had for the concerning offense;
 (4) the juvenile court finds from a preponderance of the evidence that:
 (A)  it was beyond the control of the state to practically proceed in court before turning 18; or  
(B) after due diligence it was not practicable to before being 18 because: 
 there was no PC and new evidence has been found, suspect could not be found, or 
 a previous transfer order was reversed or set aside; AND
 (5)  the juvenile court determines that there is probable cause the child committed the offense
 54.02. (j) EXAMPLE
  Suspect commits sexual assault at the age of 15 on victim who is 11
  Victim does not tell anyone for almost three years. 
 Suspect is now 17 years old, almost 18 and is technically an adult; but 
offense was committed when they were a juvenile. 
 This statute allows the case to be transferred to the adult system since the 
suspect is an adult. 
 However, the state, including officers, must have done due diligence to 
investigate as quickly as possible before he turned 18 
52.04. REFERRAL TO JUVENILE COURT; 
NOTICE TO PARENTS
  Remember referral is any way a case gets to Juvenile officials (charging):
  Whenever an officer refers a case to office or official designated by the 
juvenile board the following shall accompany that referral:
 o All identifying information on child & witnesses & child’s current whereabouts
 o If taken into custody, statement of circumstances
 o Complete statement of circumstances of Delinquent Conduct or CINS
 o Complete statement of all prior contacts with child by Officer’s agency
 Notification to schools required - CCP 15.27
  Law enforcement agency head/designee shall orally notify the school 
superintendent /designee of a public primary/secondary student is 
arrested/detained for any felony or misd. below:
  Unlawful restraint, Indecent Exposure, Assault, Deadly Conduct, Terroristic Threat, or 
Organized Crime
  Unlawful use, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, drug paraphernalia, or 
marihuana
  Unlawful weapons/devices in 46.01(1-14 or 16) or 46.05 / Prohibited Weapons 
 FC 52 arrests/referrals for these offenses for students in private primary/secondary schools
 shall make notices to the principal/designee
  The arrest or referral notification shall be made within 24 hours after it or before the next 
school day, whichever is earlier. 
 Within 7 days of the oral notice, agency shall mail written notification
 54.02. WAIVER OF JURISDICTION AND DISCRETIONARY TRANSFER TO CRIMINAL 
COURT.  
(j) The juvenile court may waive its exclusive original jurisdiction and transfer a 
person to the appropriate district court or criminal district court for criminal 
proceedings if: 
(1) the person is 18 years of age or older; 
(2) the person was: 
(A) 10 years of age or older and under 17 years of age at the time the person is 
alleged to have committed a capital felony or an offense under Section 19.02, 
Penal Code; 
(B) 14 years of age or older and under 17 years of age at the time the person is 
alleged to have committed an aggravated controlled substance felony or a 
felony of the first degree other than an offense under Section 19.02, Penal 
Code; or 
(C) 15 years of age or older and under 17 years of age at the time the person is 
alleged to have committed a felony of the second or third degree or a state jail 
felony; 
(3) no adjudication concerning the alleged offense has been made or no 
adjudication hearing concerning the offense has been conducted; 
(4) the juvenile court finds from a preponderance of the evidence that: 
(A) for a reason beyond the control of the state it was not practicable to 
proceed in juvenile court before the 18th birthday of the person; or 
(B) after due diligence of the state it was not practicable to proceed in juvenile 
court before the 18th birthday of the person because: 
Chapter 54.02 (j) Example:  
Suspect commits sexual assault at the age of 15 on victim who is 11 years of 
age. Victim does not tell anyone for three years. Suspect is now 17 years old, 
almost 18 and is technically an adult; but offense was committed when they 
were a juvenile. This statute allows the case to be transferred to the adult court 
system since the suspect is an adult. However, the state, including officers, 
must have done due diligence to investigate as quickly as possible before the 
18th birthday. That depends on a few things like whether the officer had 
enough to establish probable cause.  
Referral to juvenile court; notice to parents – Family Code Chapter 52.04 – 
whenever an officer refers a case to office or official designated by the juvenile 
board the following shall accompany that referral (Remember referral also 
refers to custodial arrests – it’s any way a case gets to Juvenile officials): 
o All identifying information on child & witnesses & child’s current whereabouts 
o Complete statement of circumstances of Delinquent Conduct or CINS 
o If taken into custody, statement of circumstances 
o Complete statement of all prior contacts with child by Officer’s agency 
15.27. NOTIFICATION TO SCHOOLS REQUIRED. (a) A law enforcement agency 
that arrests any person or refers a child to the office or official designated by 
the juvenile board who the agency believes is enrolled as a student in a public 
primary or secondary school, for an offense listed in Subsection (h), shall 
attempt to ascertain whether the person is so enrolled. If the law enforcement 
agency ascertains that the individual is enrolled as a student in a public primary 
or secondary school, the head of the agency or a person designated by the 
head of the agency shall orally notify the superintendent or a person 
designated by the superintendent in the school district in which the student is 
enrolled of that arrest or referral within 24 hours after the arrest or referral is 
made, or before the next school day, whichever is earlier. If the law 
enforcement agency cannot ascertain whether the individual is enrolled as a 
student, the head of the agency or a person designated by the head of the 
agency shall orally notify the superintendent or a person designated by the 
superintendent in the school district in which the student is believed to be 
enrolled of that arrest or detention within 24 hours after the arrest or 
detention, or before the next school day, whichever is earlier. If the individual is 
a student, the superintendent or the superintendent's designee shall 
immediately notify all instructional and support personnel who have 
responsibility for supervision of the student. All personnel shall keep the 
information received in this subsection confidential. The State Board for 
Educator Certification may revoke or suspend the certification of personnel 
who intentionally violate this subsection. Within seven days after the date the 
oral notice is given, the head of the law enforcement agency or the person 
designated by the head of the agency shall mail written notification, marked 
"PERSONAL and CONFIDENTIAL" on the mailing envelope, to the 
superintendent or the person designated by the superintendent. The written 
notification must include the facts contained in the oral notification, the name 
of the person who was orally notified, and the date and time of the oral 
notification. Both the oral and written notice shall contain sufficient details of 
the arrest or referral and the acts allegedly committed by the student to enable 
the superintendent or the superintendent's designee to determine whether 
there is a reasonable belief that the student has engaged in conduct defined as 
a felony offense by the Penal Code or whether it is necessary to conduct a 
threat assessment or prepare a safety plan related to the student. The 
information contained in the notice shall be considered by the superintendent 
or the superintendent's designee in making such a determination. 
Notification to schools required - CCP 15.27
  Written notice marked "PERSONAL and CONFIDENTIAL" on the envelope 
must include the oral notice facts, name of who was orally notified, & its 
date and time
  Oral or written notices  must include all pertinent details of the offense or 
conduct, including details of any:
  (1) assaultive behavior or other violence;
  (2) weapons used in the commission of the offense or conduct; or
  (3) weapons possessed during the offense or conduct
  If requested by the superintendent or designee: any suspect info needed for a threat 
assessment or the prep of a safety plan relating to the student suspect. 
 A person may substitute an electronic notice for an oral one & if substituted, 
written required notices are then not required.
  School officials receiving notice must notify school personnel having direct 
supervisory responsibility over the student 
(a-1) The superintendent or a person designated by the superintendent in the 
school district shall send to a school district employee having direct supervisory 
responsibility over the student the information contained in the confidential 
notice under Subsection (a). 
(b) On conviction, deferred prosecution, or deferred adjudication or an 
adjudication of delinquent conduct of an individual enrolled as a student in a 
public primary or secondary school, for an offense or for any conduct listed in 
Subsection (h) of this article, the office of the prosecuting attorney acting in the 
case shall orally notify the superintendent or a person designated by the 
superintendent in the school district in which the student is enrolled of the 
conviction or adjudication and whether the student is required to register as a 
sex offender under Chapter 62. Oral notification must be given within 24 hours 
of the time of the order or before the next school day, whichever is earlier. The 
superintendent shall, within 24 hours of receiving notification from the office of 
the prosecuting attorney, or before the next school day, whichever is earlier, 
notify all instructional and support personnel who have regular contact with 
the student. Within seven days after the date the oral notice is given, the office 
of the prosecuting attorney shall mail written notice, which must contain a 
statement of the offense of which the individual is convicted or on which the 
adjudication, deferred adjudication, or deferred prosecution is grounded and a 
statement of whether the student is required to register as a sex offender 
under Chapter 62. 
(c) A parole, probation, or community supervision office, including a community 
supervision and corrections department, a juvenile probation department, the 
paroles division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, and the Texas 
Juvenile Justice Department, having jurisdiction over a student described by 
Subsection (a), (b), or (e) who transfers from a school or is subsequently 
removed from a school and later returned to a school or school district other 
than the one the student was enrolled in when the arrest, referral to a juvenile 
court, conviction, or adjudication occurred shall within 24 hours of learning of 
the student's transfer or reenrollment, or before the next school day, 
whichever is earlier, notify the superintendent or a person designated by the 
superintendent of the school district to which the student transfers or is 
returned or, in the case of a private school, the principal or a school employee 
designated by the principal of the school to which the student transfers or is 
returned of the arrest or referral in a manner similar to that provided for by 
Subsection (a) or (e)(1), or of the conviction or delinquent adjudication in a 
manner similar to that provided for by Subsection (b) or (e)(2). The 
superintendent of the school district to which the student transfers or is 
returned or, in the case of a private school, the principal of the school to which 
the student transfers or is returned shall, within 24 hours of receiving 
notification under this subsection or before the next school day, whichever is 
earlier, notify all instructional and support personnel who have regular contact 
with the student. 
Notification to schools required - CCP 15.27
  It’s a Class C to intentionally disclose unauthorized info 
 Prosecution Attorney offices have the report duties too:
  24 hour/next day for required convictions & sex offender offenses 
 2 days for dismissed/not guilty resolutions for relevant cases
  Parole, probation, or community supervision w/ jurisdiction for students also 
have report duties for school changes/transfers
  Failed reports required here, shall be reported as below:
  School personnel to the State Board for Educator Certification
  Law enforcement to TCOLE
  Prosecution personnel to the elected DA 
 Parole or Probation personnel to the Director of the employee entity
 (e)(1) A law enforcement agency that arrests, or refers to a juvenile court under 
Chapter 52, Family Code, an individual who the law enforcement agency knows 
or believes is enrolled as a student in a private primary or secondary school 
shall make the oral and written notifications described by Subsection (a) to the 
principal or a school employee designated by the principal of the school in 
which the student is enrolled. 
(2) On conviction, deferred prosecution, or deferred adjudication or an 
adjudication of delinquent conduct of an individual enrolled as a student in a 
private primary or secondary school, the office of prosecuting attorney shall 
make the oral and written notifications described by Subsection (b) of this 
article to the principal or a school employee designated by the principal of the 
school in which the student is enrolled. 
(3) The principal of a private school in which the student is enrolled or a school 
employee designated by the principal shall send to a school employee having 
direct supervisory responsibility over the student the information contained in 
the confidential notice, for the same purposes as described by Subsection (a-1) 
of this article. 
(f) A person who receives information under this article may not disclose the 
information except as specifically authorized by this article. A person who 
intentionally violates this article commits an offense. An offense under this 
subsection is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(g) The office of the prosecuting attorney or the office or official designated by 
the juvenile board shall, within two working days, notify the school district that 
removed a student to a disciplinary alternative education program under 
Section 37.006, Education Code, if: 
(1) prosecution of the student's case was refused for lack of prosecutorial merit 
or insufficient evidence and no formal proceedings, deferred adjudication, or 
deferred prosecution will be initiated; or 
(2) the court or jury found the student not guilty or made a finding the child did 
not engage in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision 
and the case was dismissed with prejudice. 
(h) This article applies to any felony offense and the following misdemeanors: 
(1) an offense under Section 20.02, 21.08, 22.01, 22.05, 22.07, or 71.02, Penal 
Code; 
(2) the unlawful use, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, drug 
paraphernalia, or marihuana, as defined by Chapter 481, Health and Safety 
Code; or 
(3) the unlawful possession of any of the weapons or devices listed in Sections 
46.01(1)-(14) or (16), Penal Code, or a weapon listed as a prohibited weapon 
under Section 46.05, Penal Code. 
(i) A person may substitute electronic notification for oral notification where 
oral notification is required by this article. If electronic notification is 
substituted for oral notification, any written notification required by this article 
is not required. 
(j) The notification provisions of this section concerning a person who is 
required to register as a sex offender under Chapter 62 do not lessen the 
requirement of a person to provide any additional notification prescribed by 
that chapter. 
(k) Oral or written notice required under this article must include all pertinent 
details of the offense or conduct, including details of any: 
(1) assaultive behavior or other violence; 
(2) weapons used in the commission of the offense or conduct; or 
(3) weapons possessed during the commission of the offense or conduct. 
(k-1) In addition to the information provided under Subsection (k), the law 
enforcement agency shall provide to the superintendent or superintendent's 
designee information relating to the student that is requested for the purpose 
of conducting a threat assessment or preparing a safety plan relating to that 
student. A school board may enter into a memorandum of understanding with 
a law enforcement agency regarding the exchange of information relevant to 
conducting a threat assessment or preparing a safety plan. Absent a 
memorandum of understanding, the information requested by the 
superintendent or the superintendent's designee shall be considered relevant. 
(l) If a school district board of trustees learns of a failure by the superintendent 
of the district or a district principal to provide a notice required under 
Subsection (a), (a-1), or (b), the board of trustees shall report the failure to the 
State Board for Educator Certification. If the governing body of a private 
primary or secondary school learns of a failure by the principal of the school to 
provide a notice required under Subsection (e), and the principal holds a 
certificate issued under Subchapter B, Chapter 21, Education Code, the 
governing body shall report the failure to the State Board for Educator 
Certification. 
(m) If the superintendent of a school district in which the student is enrolled 
learns of a failure of the head of a law enforcement agency or a person 
designated by the head of the agency to provide a notification under 
Subsection (a), the superintendent or principal shall report the failure to notify 
to the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. 
(n) If a juvenile court judge or official designated by the juvenile board learns of 
a failure by the office of the prosecuting attorney to provide a notification 
required under Subsection (b) or (g), the official shall report the failure to notify 
to the elected prosecuting attorney responsible for the operation of the office. 
(o) If the supervisor of a parole, probation, or community supervision 
department officer learns of a failure by the officer to provide a notification 
under Subsection (c), the supervisor shall report the failure to notify to the 
director of the entity that employs the officer. 
53.01.  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION AND 
DETERMINATIONS;  NOTICE TO PARENTS
  Once a child’s case is referred, the board, intake officer if in detention, 
juvenile probation officer if not, or board’s designee (juvenile referee) shall 
conduct a preliminary investigation to determine
  The person is a child, and
  Probable cause to believe the child:
 Engaged in DC or CINS, or 
Is a nonoffender and being detained solely for deportation
 53.01. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATIONS; NOTICE TO 
PARENTS. (a) On referral of a person believed to be a child or on referral of the 
person's case to the office or official designated by the juvenile board, the 
intake officer, probation officer, or other person authorized by the board shall 
conduct a preliminary investigation to determine whether: 
(1) the person referred to juvenile court is a child within the meaning of this 
t
 itle; and 
(2) there is probable cause to believe the person: 
(A) engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision; 
or 
(B) is a nonoffender who has been taken into custody and is being held solely 
for deportation out of the United States. 
(b) If it is determined that the person is not a child or there is no probable 
cause, the person shall immediately be released. 
53.02.  RELEASE FROM DETENTION
  When brought before the court or to detention, the intake or authorized officer shall:
 o  Immediately make an investigation and release unless the detention is warranted
 o  Considerations used to detain:
 Is the child likely to abscond or be removed from jurisdiction?
 No suitable supervision, care or protection for child in real world
 No parent able to return child to court when required
 Child is dangerous to him/herself or public if released
 Previously Delinquent or convicted of jailable/prison offense & likely to re-offend
 If the child is accused of delinquent conduct & to have used, possessed, or exhibited a 
firearm (Judge MUST see these cases)
 o  There may be conditions of released imposed (similar to bond conditions)
  Absent these: juvenile will not be detained while the case progresses thru the system.
 54.01.  DETENTION HEARING
  If a child is detained for reasons in 53.02, a detention hearing without a jury SHALL be 
held within the 2nd working day of the custody (if Friday/Saturday, then 1st working)
 o Parents must have notice of hearing
 o Court shall appoint attorney if one is not retained prior
 o Court will consider written reports from probation officers, professional court employees and 
witnesses – PO rarely called to testify, so have all reports completed and submitted 
o Unless Judge can justify the considerations from FC 53.02, the Court shall order the child 
released while the case moves through the system)
 o If child is ordered detained, then another detention hearing will be held in 10 days and so 
on for as long as child is held in detention.
 33.9. Identify the legal requirements for the release of a child brought before 
the court or delivered to a detention facility. 
Release from Detention – Family Code Chapter 53.02 – When a child in brought 
before the court or delivered to detention, the intake or authorized officer 
(intake at detention or juvenile probation officer if not detention) of the court 
Shall: 
o Immediately make an investigation and 
o Release unless detention warranted 
o There may be conditions of released imposed (think similar to conditions of 
bond in adult cases) 
o Considerations used to detain: 
Is the child likely to abscond or be removed from jurisdiction? 
No suitable supervision, care or protection for child in real world 
No parent able to return child to court when required 
The child is dangerous to him/herself or public if released 
The child was previously found Delinquent or convicted of jailable or prison 
offense and likely to re-offend if released 
If the child is accused of delinquent conduct and is alleged to have used, 
possessed, or exhibited a firearm - ** Judge MUST see these cases 
o Absent the above conditions – a juvenile will be released back to parent and 
not detained. It doesn’t mean you have no case, but instead, that the child isn’t 
going to be kept confined while the case is progressing through the system. 
33.10. Identify the legal requirements for a detention hearing without a jury if 
the child is not released. 
Detention Hearing – Family Code Chapter 54.01– if a child is detained (see 
above FC 53.02 for the reasons a child would be detained), then a detention 
hearing without a jury SHALL be held no later than second working day after 
the child is taken into custody. (Unless brought in on a Friday/Saturday, then 
hearing held first working day) 
o Parents have to have notice of hearing 
o Court shall appoint attorney if one not retained prior to detention hearing 
o At hearing Court will consider written reports from probation officers, 
professional court employees and witnesses – rarely is a Peace Officer called to 
testify in these hearings. However, all the other witnesses based their 
testimony on the Officer’s full & complete report of their investigation. 
Therefore, it is best practice to have all reports, statements, etc. completed 
prior to taking a juvenile into custody.  
o Unless Judge can justify the considerations from FC 53.02, the Court shall 
order the child released. (But, again, it just means the child won’t be confined. 
The case is still viable and moving through the system)  
o If child ordered detained, then another detention hearing will be held in 10 
days and so on for as long as child is held in detention.  
54.011.  DETENTION HEARINGS FOR STATUS 
OFFENDERS AND NONOFFENDERS;  PENALTY
 (a) Detention hearing for a status/nonoffender, not released administratively under 
53.02 shall be held before the 24th hour of arrival, excluding weekend/holiday hours 
 Judge/referee conducting the hearing shall release unless the conditions below apply
 (b) Judge/referee may order a child in violation of a valid court order detained not 
longer than 72 hours after the order was entered, excluding weekends/holidays, if:
 (1) judge/referee finds there is PC for the court order violation;  and
 (2) the detention of the child is justified under Section 54.01(e)(1), (2), or (3).
 (c) Except for (d), a detention order entered under (b) may be extended for another 
72-hours, excluding weekends/holidays, only on a juvenile court’s finding of good cause
 (d) A detention order under this section may be extended on the demand of the child's 
attorney only for time necessary for an attorney to prepare for up to 10 working days.
 54.011.  DETENTION HEARINGS FOR STATUS 
OFFENDERS AND NONOFFENDERS;  PENALTY
 (e) Status offender may be detained for a necessary period, not to exceed the period 
in the Interstate Compact for Juveniles & Ch 60, allowing home return in another state
 (f) Except for (a), a nonoffender or a person in custody for deportation, may not be 
detained for any time-period in a secure detention/correctional facility
  Nonoffender detained under this subsection is entitled to immediate release from the facility 
and may bring a civil action against any responsible person for the illegal detention 
 A person commits an offense if the person knowingly detains or assists in detaining a 
nonoffender in a secure detention/correctional facility in violation of this subsection.  
 An offense under this subsection is a Class B misdemeanor.
 52.03. DISPOSITION WITHOUT 
REFERRAL TO COURT. 
 This pertains to Class C’s, other than traffic offenses
  Can dispose of case without referring to Court or charging the child if:
 Guidelines for this were adopted by the juvenile board in the county and the disposition is 
authorized by guidelines
 Officer makes a written report of the disposition to his/her agency and specifies the 
grounds for the custody or accusation of criminal conduct was authorized
  No disposition can keep the child in law-enforcement custody or require periodic 
reporting of the child to law enforcement officer, agency of other agency
  Disposition may involve referral to an agency other than juvenile court, brief 
conference with a child & parent/guardian/custodian, or referral of both for services
 54.011. DETENTION HEARINGS FOR STATUS OFFENDERS AND NONOFFENDERS; 
PENALTY. (a) The detention hearing for a status offender or nonoffender who 
has not been released administratively under Section 53.02 shall be held before 
the 24th hour after the time the child arrived at a detention facility, excluding 
hours of a weekend or a holiday. Except as otherwise provided by this section, 
the judge or referee conducting the detention hearing shall release the status 
offender or nonoffender from secure detention. 
(b) The judge or referee may order a child in detention accused of the violation 
of a valid court order as defined by Section 51.02 detained not longer than 72 
hours after the time the detention order was entered, excluding weekends and 
holidays, if: 
(1) the judge or referee finds at the detention hearing that there is probable 
cause to believe the child violated the valid court order; and 
(2) the detention of the child is justified under Section 54.01(e)(1), (2), or (3). 
(c) Except as provided by Subsection (d), a detention order entered under 
Subsection (b) may be extended for one additional 72-hour period, excluding 
weekends and holidays, only on a finding of good cause by the juvenile court. 
(d) A detention order for a child under this section may be extended on the 
demand of the child's attorney only to allow the time that is necessary to 
comply with the requirements of Section 51.10(h), entitling the attorney to 10 
days to prepare for an adjudication hearing. 
(e) A status offender may be detained for a necessary period, not to exceed the 
period allowed under the Interstate Compact for Juveniles, to enable the child's 
return to the child's home in another state under Chapter 60. 
(f) Except as provided by Subsection (a), a nonoffender, including a person who 
has been taken into custody and is being held solely for deportation out of the 
United States, may not be detained for any period of time in a secure detention 
facility or secure correctional facility, regardless of whether the facility is 
publicly or privately operated. A nonoffender who is detained in violation of 
this subsection is entitled to immediate release from the facility and may bring 
a civil action for compensation for the illegal detention against any person 
responsible for the detention. A person commits an offense if the person 
knowingly detains or assists in detaining a nonoffender in a secure detention 
facility or secure correctional facility in violation of this subsection. An offense 
under this subsection is a Class B misdemeanor. 
33.11. Identify the legal requirements for disposition without referral. 
Disposition without referral to court – Family Code Chapter 52.03 
o This pertains to Class C’s 
o Can dispose of case without referring to Court or charging the child if: 
Guidelines for this have been adopted by the juvenile board in county of 
disposition 
Disposition is authorized by guidelines 
Officer makes written report of disposition to his/her agency and specifies 
the grounds for believing that the taking into custody or accusation of criminal 
conduct was authorized 
o No disposition can keep the child in law-enforcement custody or require 
periodic reporting of the child to law enforcement officer, agency of other 
agency 
o Dispositions under this section may involve referring the child to an agency 
other than juvenile court, briefs conference with child and 
parent/guardian/custodian, or referral of child & parent for services 
52.031. FIRST OFFENDER PROGRAM
  May be established by the Juvenile Board for the referral & disposition of children taken into 
custody or accused of CINS offense, Class C’s, other than traffic, or Delinquent Conduct
  Not for 1st, 2nd, 3rd or Capital felony offenses; aggravated controlled substances; or SJF/ 
misdemeanors involving violence; or use/possession of firearm, knife, club, or proh. weapon.
  Must have guidelines in place from Juvenile Board
  Child & parent must consent to participate
  With successful completion, then case is closed without referral to court system.
 52.032.  INFORMAL DISPOSITION 
GUIDELINES
 (a)  The juvenile board of each county, in cooperation with each law enforcement agency in 
the county, shall adopt guidelines for the disposition of a child under 52.03 or 52.031.  
 The guidelines adopted under this section shall not be considered mandatory.
 (b) The guidelines adopted under (a) may not allow for the case of a child to be disposed of 
under 52.03/52.031 if there is PC of delinquent conduct or CINS and cause to believe the child 
may be the victim of an offense under PC 20A.02
  Additional service guidelines are in FC 264 and CCP 45.306 (Youth Diversion Plan)
 What about municipal 
and JP Courts that may 
see child offenders?
 CCP 45A.461 FAILURE TO PAY FINE OR APPEAR
 (b) JP or municipal courts may NOT order the confinement of a child (10 to 17) for:
 (1) the failure to pay all /any part of a fine/costs for a fine only conviction; or
 (2) contempt of another order of a justice or municipal court.
 (c) If a child fails to obey a JP or municipal court, constituting contempt, the court, after 
providing notice and opportunity to be heard, may:
 (1) refer the child to the juvenile court for delinquent conduct for contempt; or
 (2) retain case jurisdiction with a contempt holding and order either or both of :  
(A) Order the contemnor pay a fine not to exceed $500; or
 (B) Have DPS suspend the contemnor’s DL/permit or deny their potential issuance of a 
until the contemnor fully complies with the orders of the court.
 (g) JP/municipal courts may NOT refer a 17+ to juvenile court for contempt proceedings
 First offender program – Family Code Chapter 52.031031 – established by the 
Juvenile Board for the referral & disposition of children taken into custody or 
accused of CINS offense, Class C’s, other than traffic, or Delinquent Conduct 
o Not to be used for 1st, 2nd, 3rd or Capital felony offenses or for aggravated 
controlled substances or SJF/misdemeanor crimes involving violence to persons 
or use/possession of firearm, knife, club or prohibited weapon. 
o Must have guidelines in place from Juvenile Board 
o Child & parent must consent to participate 
o If successful completion, then case is closed without referral to court system. 
52.032. INFORMAL DISPOSITION GUIDELINES. (a) The juvenile board of each 
county, in cooperation with each law enforcement agency in the county, shall 
adopt guidelines for the disposition of a child under Section 52.03 or 52.031. 
The guidelines adopted under this section shall not be considered mandatory. 
(b) The guidelines adopted under Subsection (a) may not allow for the case of a 
child to be disposed of under Section 52.03 or 52.031 if there is probable cause 
to believe that the child engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a 
need for supervision and cause to believe that the child may be the victim of 
conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02, Penal Code. 
45A.461. FAILURE TO PAY FINE OR APPEAR. (a) In this article, "child" has the 
meaning assigned by Article 45A.453(a). 
(b) A justice or municipal court may not order the confinement of a child for: 
(1) the failure to pay all or part of a fine or cost imposed for the conviction of an 
offense punishable by fine only; 
(2) the failure to appear for an offense committed by the child; or 
(3) contempt of another order of a justice or municipal court. 
(c) If a child fails to obey an order of a justice or municipal court under 
circumstances that would constitute contempt of court, the justice or municipal 
court, after providing notice and an opportunity to be heard, may: 
(1) refer the child to the appropriate juvenile court for delinquent conduct for 
contempt of the order; or 
(2) retain jurisdiction of the case, hold the child in contempt of court, and order 
that: 
(A) the contemnor pay a fine not to exceed $500; or 
(B) the Department of Public Safety suspend the contemnor's driver's license or 
permit or, if the contemnor does not have a license or permit, deny the 
issuance of a license or permit to the contemnor until the contemnor fully 
complies with the order. 
(g) A justice or municipal court may not refer a person who violates a court 
order while 17 years of age or older to a juvenile court for delinquency 
proceedings for contempt of court. 
CCP 45A.457 FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED
 (d) JP/municipal court may hold a person in contempt and impose a (c) (2) remedy if:
 (1) the person was convicted for an offense committed before being 17;
 (2) the person failed to obey the order while being 17 or older; and
 (3) the failure to obey constitutes contempt of court.
 (e) JP/municipal court may hold contempt & impose a (c)(2) remedy if the contempt 
was before being 17, but proceedings could not be held before turning 17
 (f) Courts that order suspension/denial of a DL/permit shall notify DPS upon compliance
 CCP 45A.457 FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED
 (a) In this article: 
(1) "Child" = 10 to 17, charged with an offense
 (2) "Residence" = where the child lives or resides for a period of at least 30 days.
 (3) Parent = person standing in parental relation, managing conservator, or  
custodian
 CCP 45A.457 FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED
 (b) JP/municipal court under 4.11/4.14, finding a child committed an offense, may order:
 (1) the child/the parent for services under FC  264.302 (Early Youth Intervention Services);
 (2) program attendance (in child’s best interest), paid from expenditures, approved by the 
gov’t body: rehab, counseling, self-esteem & leadership, work & job skills, job interviewing & 
work prep, self-improvement, parenting, manners, violence avoidance, tutoring, sensitivity 
training, parental responsibility, community service, restitution, advocacy, or mentoring; or
 (3) Parents to do any act/refrain from that will increase the likelihood of child compliance & 
that is reasonable & necessary for the welfare of the child, including:
 (A) attend a parenting class or parental responsibility program; and
 (B) attend the child's school classes or functions.
 (c) Courts may order a parent/conservator/guardian to pay up to $100 of the costs
 (d) A justice or municipal court may hold a person in contempt and impose a 
remedy authorized by Subsection (c)(2) if: 
(1) the person was convicted for an offense committed before the person's 
17th birthday; 
(2) the person failed to obey the order while the person was 17 years of age or 
older; and 
(3) the failure to obey occurred under circumstances that constitute contempt 
of court. 
(e) A justice or municipal court may hold a person in contempt and impose a 
remedy authorized by Subsection (c)(2) if the person, while younger than 17 
years of age, engaged in conduct in contempt of an order issued by the court, 
but contempt proceedings could not be held before the person's 17th birthday. 
(f) A justice or municipal court that orders suspension or denial of a driver's 
license or permit under Subsection (c)(2)(B) shall notify the Department of 
Public Safety on receiving proof of compliance with the orders of the justice or 
municipal court. 
45A.457. FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED. (a) In this article: 
(1) "Child" has the meaning assigned by Article 45A.453(a). 
(2) "Parent" includes a person standing in parental relation, a managing 
conservator, or a custodian. 
(3) "Residence" means any place where the child lives or resides for a period of 
not less than 30 days. 
(b) On a finding by a justice or municipal court that a child committed an 
offense that the court has jurisdiction of under Article 4.11 or 4.14, the court 
has jurisdiction to enter an order: 
(1) referring the child or the child's parent for services under Section 264.302, 
Family Code; 
(2) requiring that the child attend a special program that the court determines 
to be in the best interest of the child and, if the program involves the 
expenditure of municipal or county funds, that is approved by the governing 
body of the municipality or county commissioners court, as applicable, 
including a program for: 
(A) rehabilitation; 
(B) counseling; 
(C) self-esteem and leadership; 
(D) work and job skills training; 
(E) job interviewing and work preparation; 
(F) self-improvement; 
(G) parenting; 
(H) manners; 
(I) violence avoidance; 
(J) tutoring; 
(K) sensitivity training; 
(L) parental responsibility; 
(M) community service; 
(N) restitution; 
(O) advocacy; or 
(P) mentoring; or 
Attend the child's school classes 
or functions? 
CCP 45A.457 FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED
 (d) JP/municipal court may require attendees to submit proof of attendance
 (e) JP/municipal court shall issue a summons with an order to appear at the hearing 
with the child and include a warning that FTA may result in arrest and is a Class C.
 (f) An order for a child under this article is enforceable under 45.050 (Fines & Contempt)
 (g) A parent, managing conservator, or guardian commits a Class C offense if (s)he fails 
to attend a hearing, after receiving an order under (e) 
(l) Any order under this article is enforceable by the JP or municipal court by contempt.
 CCP 45A.457 FINDING THAT OFFENSE COMMITTED
 (h) Those required to appear must provide the child’s address & residence in writing
  Court shall be notified of address changes for the child/parent as directed within 7 days
  A violation may result in arrest and is a Class C misdemeanor. 
 Obligation does not end when reaching 17 but does terminate on judgement discharge & 
satisfaction or a NOT guilty disposition
 (i) Upon an acceptance of a trial de novo appeal, the (h) notice shall go to the appellate court
 (j) A child & parent are entitled to written notice of their (h & i) obligation, via a copy of them by:
 (1) the court during their initial appearance before the court;
 (2) a peace officer arresting and releasing a child under 45.058(a) on release; and
 (3) a peace officer that issues a citation under TC 543.003 or CCP 14.06(b)
 (k) Affirmative defense under (h) that the child and parent were not informed of their obligation
 (3) requiring that the child's parent perform any act or refrain from performing 
any act as the court determines will increase the likelihood that the child will 
comply with the orders of the court and that is reasonable and necessary for 
the welfare of the child, including: 
(A) attend a parenting class or parental responsibility program; and 
(B) attend the child's school classes or functions. 
(c) The justice or municipal court may order the parent of a child required to 
attend a program under Subsection (b) to pay an amount not to exceed $100 
for the costs of the program. 
(d) A justice or municipal court may require a child or parent required to attend 
a program, class, or function under this article to submit proof of attendance to 
the court. 
(e) A justice or municipal court shall endorse on the summons issued to a 
parent an order to appear personally at the hearing with the child. The 
summons must include a warning that the failure of the parent to appear is a 
Class C misdemeanor and may result in arrest. 
(f) An order under this article involving a child is enforceable under Article 
45A.461. 
(g) A person commits an offense if the person is a parent who fails to attend a 
hearing under this article after receiving an order under Subsection (e). An 
offense under this subsection is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(l) Any order under this article is enforceable by the justice or municipal court 
by contempt. 
(h) A child and parent required to appear before the court have an obligation to 
provide the child's current address and residence to the court in writing. The 
obligation does not end when the child reaches age 17. On or before the 
seventh day after the date the child or parent changes residence, the child or 
parent shall notify the court of the current address in the manner directed by 
the court. A violation of this subsection is a Class C misdemeanor and may 
result in arrest. The obligation to provide notice terminates on discharge and 
satisfaction of the judgment or a final disposition not requiring a finding of guilt. 
(i) If an appellate court accepts an appeal for a trial de novo, the child and 
parent shall provide the notice under Subsection (h) to the appellate court. 
(j) The child and parent are entitled to written notice of their obligation under 
Subsections (h) and (i), which may be satisfied if a copy of those subsections is 
delivered to the child and parent by: 
(1) the court during their initial appearance before the court; 
(2) a peace officer arresting and releasing a child under Article 45A.453(b) at 
the time of release; or 
(3) a peace officer who issues a notice to appear under Section 543.003, 
Transportation Code, or a citation under Article 14.06(b). 
(k) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (h) that the 
child and parent were not informed of their obligation under this article. 
FC 151.001. RIGHTS & DUTIES OF PARENT (a) 
(1) to have physical possession, direct the moral & religious training, & designate the residence;
 (2) duty of care, control, protection, and reasonable discipline of the child;
 (3) duty to support the child with clothing, food, shelter, medical & dental care, & education;
 (4) Duty to manage a child’s estate, except when an estate guardian has been appointed , 
(5) Except for  264.0111, the right to the services and earnings of the child;
 (6) to consent to a child's marriage, enlistment in the U.S. armed forces, medical and dental 
care, and psychiatric, psychological, and surgical treatment;
 (7) to represent the child in legal action & make other decisions of substantial legal significance;
 (8) to receive, give pay  receipt for a child’s support & hold/disburse funds for a child’s benefit;
 (9) the right to inherit from and through the child;
 (10) the right to make decisions concerning the child's education; and
 (11) any other right or duty existing between a parent and child by virtue of law.
 151.001. RIGHTS & DUTIES OF PARENT
 (b) The duty of a parent to support his or her child exists while the child is an unemancipated
 minor and continues as long as the child is fully enrolled in a secondary school in a program 
leading toward a high school diploma and complies with attendance requirements described 
by Section 154.002(a)(2).
 (c) A parent who fails to discharge the duty of support is liable to a person who provides 
necessaries to those to whom support is owed.
 (d) The rights and duties of a parent are subject to:
 (1) a court order affecting the rights and duties;
 (2) an affidavit of relinquishment of parental rights; and
 (3) an affidavit by the parent designating another person or agency to act as managing 
conservator.
 151.001. RIGHTS & DUTIES OF PARENT
 (e) Only the following persons may use corporal punishment for the 
reasonable discipline of a child:
 (1) a parent or grandparent of the child;
 (2) a stepparent of the child who has the duty of control and reasonable discipline of the 
child; and
 (3) an individual who is a guardian of the child and who has the duty of control and 
reasonable discipline of the child.
 33.12. Identify the rights and duties of parents. 
151.001. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PARENT. (a) A parent of a child has the 
following rights and duties: 
(1) the right to have physical possession, to direct the moral and religious 
training, and to designate the residence of the child; 
(2) the duty of care, control, protection, and reasonable discipline of the child; 
(3) the duty to support the child, including providing the child with clothing, 
food, shelter, medical and dental care, and education; 
(4) the duty, except when a guardian of the child's estate has been appointed, 
to manage the estate of the child, including the right as an agent of the child to 
act in relation to the child's estate if the child's action is required by a state, the 
United States, or a foreign government; 
(5) except as provided by Section 264.0111, the right to the services and 
earnings of the child; 
(6) the right to consent to the child's marriage, enlistment in the armed forces 
of the United States, medical and dental care, and psychiatric, psychological, 
and surgical treatment; 
(7) the right to represent the child in legal action and to make other decisions 
of substantial legal significance concerning the child; 
(8) the right to receive and give receipt for payments for the support of the 
child and to hold or disburse funds for the benefit of the child; 
(9) the right to inherit from and through the child; 
(10) the right to make decisions concerning the child's education; and 
(11) any other right or duty existing between a parent and child by virtue of 
law. 
(b) The duty of a parent to support his or her child exists while the child is an 
unemancipated minor and continues as long as the child is fully enrolled in a 
secondary school in a program leading toward a high school diploma and 
complies with attendance requirements described by Section 154.002(a)(2). 
(c) A parent who fails to discharge the duty of support is liable to a person who 
provides necessaries to those to whom support is owed. 
(d) The rights and duties of a parent are subject to: 
(1) a court order affecting the rights and duties; 
(2) an affidavit of relinquishment of parental rights; and 
(3) an affidavit by the parent designating another person or agency to act as 
managing conservator. 
(e) Only the following persons may use corporal punishment for the reasonable 
discipline of a child: 
(1) a parent or grandparent of the child; 
(2) a stepparent of the child who has the duty of control and reasonable 
discipline of the child; and 
(3) an individual who is a guardian of the child and who has the duty of control 
and reasonable discipline of the child. 
151.003.  LIMITATION ON 
STATE AGENCY ACTION
 A state agency may not adopt rules or policies or take any other action that 
violates the fundamental right and duty of a parent to direct the upbringing of 
the parent's child.
 153.074. RIGHTS AND DUTIES DURING 
PERIOD OF POSSESSION
 Unless limited by court order, a parent appointed as a conservator of a child has the 
following rights and duties during the period that the parent has possession:
 (1) the duty of care, control, protection, and reasonable discipline of the child;
 (2) the duty to support the child, including providing the child with clothing, food, 
shelter, and medical and dental care not involving an invasive procedure;
 (3) the right to consent for the child to medical and dental care not involving an 
invasive procedure; and
 (4) the right to direct the moral and religious training of the child.
 Bonus Info 
FC 53.01
 Once a child’s case is referred to juvenile, the board, the intake 
officer, the probation officer or the board’s designee shall 
conduct a preliminary investigation to determine
 The person is a child, and
 Probable cause to believe the child:
 Engaged in DC or CINS, or 
Is a nonoffender and being detained solely for deportation
  FC 53.02
  Outlines When a Child May be Released from Detention 
 Immediately if no PC 
 Or under conditions reasonably necessary to insure the child’s appearance at later 
proceedings, in writing 
 Outlines When a Child Must be Retained Prior to a Petition Hearing 
 Child is likely to abscond
  No suitable supervision
  No one the court can return the child to
  Danger to themselves or the public 
 Previously found delinquent and is likely to repeat, and/or
  Engaged in DC and used, possessed, or exhibited a firearm. 
151.003. LIMITATION ON STATE AGENCY ACTION. A state agency may not adopt 
rules or policies or take any other action that violates the fundamental right 
and duty of a parent to direct the upbringing of the parent's child. 
153.074. RIGHTS AND DUTIES DURING PERIOD OF POSSESSION. Unless limited 
by court order, a parent appointed as a conservator of a child has the following 
rights and duties during the period that the parent has possession of the child: 
(1) the duty of care, control, protection, and reasonable discipline of the child; 
(2) the duty to support the child, including providing the child with clothing, 
food, shelter, and medical and dental care not involving an invasive procedure; 
(3) the right to consent for the child to medical and dental care not involving an 
invasive procedure; and 
(4) the right to direct the moral and religious training of the child. 
When are we ever going to need 
to know this?
 Imagine if…
  You received a 911 call about car windows being broken in the 
parking lot of an apartment complex. 
 When you arrive, you locate A. A. Ron who done messed up. 
 You’ve determined there is probable cause to arrest for…
  What changes when you discover A A Ron is 13 years old? 
 Detained
  Juvenile Processing Office
  Maximum time allotted for detainment? 
 Juvenile Detention Report/Prosecution Report
  Released to? 
 Juvenile Detention Facility 
 Parents, or 
Video
 Life Inside Pendleton: The Offender’s 
View 
5 Domains of Risk Factors for Joining Youth Gangs
 1. Individual 
2. Family 
3. • School 
4. • Peers 
5. • Community 
33.24. Identify the five domains of risk factors for youth joining gangs.  
Five Domains of Risk Factors for youth gang involvement:  
• Individual  
• Family  
• School  
• Peers  
• Community  
Five Domains of Risk Factors 
for youth gang involvement:
 1. Individual: problem behavior/acting out, negative life events, victimization.
 2. Family: disrupted family structure (death, divorce), poor supervision, 
inconsistent discipline, lack of parental interest/involvement
 3. School: poor academic performance, low attachment, poor school 
environment, learning disabilities.
 4. Peers: one of the strongest factors, normalize anti-social behavior, alienation 
from mainstream.
 5. Community: poverty, environmental instability, neighborhood disorganization
 Needs met by gangs for juveniles:
  Status
  Self-worth/esteem
  Acceptance
  Credibility/notoriety
  Recognition of identity 
 Fun/excitement/risk
  Substitution for boredom
  Bonding
  Obtain wealth/materialism
  Survival 
 Protection
 Underlying societal strains that 
give rise to gangs:
  High unemployment
  Lack of primary groups for bonding
  Atmosphere of discrimination/abuse/criticism 
 Community seen as uncaring
  Environment that uses intimidation and aggression to solve problems 
 Youth’s lack of self control development and respect for self and others
  Illegal activity is profitable
 Three phases of gang involvement:
 1. Minor Mischief 
2. Seeking Identity 
 Colors, hand signals, clothing, tattoos, slogans, 
graffiti, bandanas, and jackets
 3. Crime/Criminal Behavior: drive-by 
shootings, drugs, killings
 o Individual- problem behavior/acting out; negative life events; victimization 
o Family – disrupted family structure (death, divorce); poor supervision; 
inconsistent discipline; lack of parental interest/involvement 
o School – poor academic performance; low attachment; poor school 
environment; learning disabilities 
o Peers (one of the strongest factors) – normalize anti-social behavior; 
alienation from mainstream; 
o Community – poverty; environmental instability; neighborhood 
disorganization 
33.25. Discuss three important points associated with youth gang 
involvement.  
• The presence of multiple domains in a youth’s life increases the likelihood of 
gang involvement.  
• Most youth are not forced to join.  
• Joining a gang is not a permanent decision.  
Needs met by gangs for juveniles:  
• Status  
• Self-worth/esteem  
• Acceptance  
• Fun/excitement/risk  
• Credibility/notoriety  
• Protection  
• Recognition of identity  
• Bonding  
• Substitution for boredom  
• Obtain wealth and materialism.  
• Survival  
Underlying societal strains that give rise to gangs:  
• High unemployment  
• Lack of primary groups for bonding  
• Atmosphere of discrimination/abuse/criticism  
• Community seen as uncaring.  
• Youth’s lack of self-control development and respect for self and others  
• Environment that uses intimidation and aggression to solve problems.  
• Illegal activity is profitable.  
Three phases of gang involvement 
• Minor Mischief  
• Seeking Identity: Colors, hand signals, clothing, tattoos, slogans, graffiti, 
bandanas, and jackets 
• Crime/Criminal Behavior: drive-by shootings, drugs, killings 
Bonus 
 SB 1114
  Education Code Offenses
 Denton Police Summer Youth Program
 
 
Reference:
 https://www.dps.texas.gov/director_staff/media_and_co
 mmunications/2018/txGangThreatAssessment201811.pdf
 THE END . . . QUESTIONS?
 
Conclusion 
• Q/A Session 
• Review 
• Tour 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 