Penal Code &
 Crimes Against 
Persons
 Basic Peace Officer Course
 City of Denton Police Department
 Penal Code Offenses 
Against the Person
 Apply the elements of offenses as they 
relate to sexual offenses.
 25.02.  PROHIBITED SEXUAL CONDUCT
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 a) engages in sexual/deviate sexual intercourse with another 
the actor knows to be, without regard to legitimacy, the:
 (1) actor's ancestor/descendant by blood or adoption;
 (2) actor's current/former stepchild or stepparent;
 (3) actor's parent's brother/sister (whole or half blood);
 (4) actor's brother/sister (whole or half blood) or by 
adoption;
 (5) (4)’s children (whole/half blood) or by adoption); or
 (6) aunt/uncle’s son/daughter (whole/half) or adoption.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (b) (1) Deviate sexual intercourse = any contact with 
the genitals of one and the mouth/anus of another 
with intent to arouse or gratify sexual desire
 (2) Sexual intercourse = any penetration of the 
female sex organ by the male sex organ.
 e) 3°F for (a2-6)
 2°F if under (a1)
 Adult Victims
 25.02. PROHIBITED SEXUAL CONDUCT. (a) A person commits an offense if the 
person engages in sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse with 
another person the actor knows to be, without regard to legitimacy: 
(1) the actor's ancestor or descendant by blood or adoption; 
(2) the actor's current or former stepchild or stepparent; 
(3) the actor's parent's brother or sister of the whole or half blood; 
(4) the actor's brother or sister of the whole or half blood or by adoption; 
(5) the children of the actor's brother or sister of the whole or half blood or 
by adoption; or 
(6) the son or daughter of the actor's aunt or uncle of the whole or half blood 
or by adoption. 
(b) For purposes of this section: 
(1) "Deviate sexual intercourse" means any contact between the genitals of 
one person and the mouth or anus of another person with intent to arouse or 
gratify the sexual desire of any person. 
(2) "Sexual intercourse" means any penetration of the female sex organ by 
the male sex organ. 
(c) An offense under this section is a felony of the third degree, unless the 
offense is committed under Subsection (a)(1), in which event the offense is a 
felony of the second degree. 
INDECENT ASSAULT: 22.012 (a)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Without consent and with intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person, 
(s)he: 
Enhancements
 (1) touches the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of another person;
 (2) touches another person with the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of any person;
 (3) exposes or attempts to expose another’s genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or female 
areola; or
 (4) causes another to contact the blood, seminal fluid, vaginal fluid, saliva, urine, or feces 
of anyone.
 Stackable
 Class A
 Sexual Assaults are acts of violence
 The perpetrator's purpose is to exercise power over victim.
 These are not crimes of sexual desire.
 Means of control is of importance in the classification of the offense.
 o Force or threat of the use of force
 o Administering of drugs (includes alcohol)
 o Incapacity of victim to consent (physical or mental condition)
 It is sometimes difficult to achieve full victim cooperation due to psychological trauma 
An officer's attitude has a significant bearing on their ability to deal with it and assist
 Sec. 22.012. INDECENT ASSAULT. (a) A person commits an offense if, without 
the other person's consent and with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual 
desire of any person, the person: 
(1) touches the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of another person; 
(2) touches another person with the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals 
of any person; 
(3) exposes or attempts to expose another person's genitals, pubic area, anus, 
buttocks, or female areola; or 
(4) causes another person to contact the blood, seminal fluid, vaginal fluid, 
saliva, urine, or feces of any person. 
(b) An offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor, except that the 
offense is: 
(1) a state jail felony if it is shown on the trial of the offense that: 
(A) the defendant has been previously convicted of an offense under this 
section, other than an offense punishable under Paragraph (B); or 
(B) the defendant is a health care services provider or a mental health 
services provider and the act is: 
(i) committed during the course of providing a treatment or service to the 
victim; and 
(ii) beyond the scope of generally accepted practices for the treatment or 
service; or 
(2) a felony of the third degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that 
the defendant has been previously convicted of an offense under this section 
that is punishable under Subdivision (1)(B). 
(c) If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under another law, the actor may be prosecuted under this 
section, the other law, or both. 
(d) In this section, "health care services provider" and "mental health services 
provider" have the meanings assigned by Section 22.011. 
32.15 Sexual Assaults:  
• Penal Code Chapter 22.011, 22.021  
• Sexual Assaults are acts of violence. 
o The perpetrator's purpose is to exercise power over victim.  
o These are not crimes of sexual desire.  
• Means of control is of importance in the classification of the offense. o 
Force or threat of the use of force  
o Administering of drugs (includes alcohol)  
o Incapacity of victim to consent (physical or mental condition)  
• It is sometimes difficult to achieve full cooperation of victim due to 
psychological trauma. o Officer's attitude has a significant bearing on the 
victim's ability to deal with crime and assist law enforcement.  
SEXUAL OFFENSES, Sec. 21.01.  DEFINITIONS
 (1)  "Deviate sexual intercourse" means:
 (A)  any contact between any part of the genitals of one person and the mouth or anus of 
another person;  or
 (B)  the penetration of the genitals or the anus of another person with an object.
 (2)  "Sexual contact" except as provided by Section 21.11, any touching of the anus, breast, or any 
part of the genitals of another person with intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of anyone.
 (3)  "Sexual intercourse" means any penetration of the female sex organ by the male sex organ.
 SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (a) (1)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 intentionally or knowingly & without 
consent:
 (A)  causes penetration of the anus or sexual 
organ of another by any means;
 (B)  causes penetration of the mouth of 
another by the sexual organ of the actor;  
(C)  or causes the sexual organ of another 
person to contact or penetrate the mouth, 
anus, or sexual organ of another, including the 
actor
 Defense Arguments & Enhancements
 2°F
 1°F
 If:
 (f) actor is prohibited from marrying or living 
under the appearance of being married to the 
victim under 25.01: BIGAMY; or 
actor is prohibited from engaging in sexual 
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse under 
25.02: PROHIBITED SEXUAL CONDUCT
 SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (b)
 Conduct is without consent if the actor:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (1) compels by physical force or violence;
 (2) compels by threat of force or violence against a victim, who believes the actor has a present ability 
to execute the threat;
 (7) compels by threat of force or violence against any person, & the victim believes the actor has the 
ability to execute it;
 (3) knows a victim did not consent and is unconscious or physically unable to resist (4) knows that 
due to mental disease or defect a victim was incapable of appraising the nature of or resisting the act; 
(1)  "Deviate sexual intercourse" means: 
(A)  any contact between any part of the genitals of one person and 
the mouth or anus of another person;  or 
(B)  the penetration of the genitals or the anus of another person 
with an object. 
(2)  "Sexual contact" except as provided by Section 21.11, any touching of the 
anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of another person with intent to 
arouse or gratify the sexual desire of anyone. 
(3)  "Sexual intercourse" means any penetration of the female sex organ by 
the male sex organ. 
Sec. 22.011. SEXUAL ASSAULT. (a) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) the person intentionally or knowingly: 
(A) causes the penetration of the anus or sexual organ of another person by 
any means, without that person's consent; 
(B) causes the penetration of the mouth of another person by the sexual 
organ of the actor, without that person's consent; or 
(C) causes the sexual organ of another person, without that person's consent, 
to contact or penetrate the mouth, anus, or sexual organ of another person, 
including the actor; or 
(f) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that 
an offense under this section is: 
(1) a felony of the first degree if the victim was: 
(A) a person whom the actor was prohibited from marrying or purporting to 
marry or with whom the actor was prohibited from living under the 
appearance of being married under Section 25.01; or 
(B) a person with whom the actor was prohibited from engaging in sexual 
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse under Section 25.02;  
(b) A sexual assault under Subsection (a)(1) is without the consent of the 
other person if: 
(1) the actor compels the other person to submit or participate by the use of 
physical force, violence, or coercion; 
(2) the actor compels the other person to submit or participate by 
threatening to use force or violence against the other person or to cause 
harm to the other person, and the other person believes that the actor has 
the present ability to execute the threat; 
(3) the other person has not consented and the actor knows the other person 
is unconscious or physically unable to resist; 
(4) the actor knows that as a result of mental disease or defect the other 
person is at the time of the sexual assault incapable either of appraising the 
nature of the act or of resisting it; 
(7) the actor compels the other person to submit or participate by 
threatening to use force or violence against any person, and the other person 
believes that the actor has the ability to execute the threat; 
SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (b)
 Conduct is without consent if the actor:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (5) knows the victim has not consented &  is unaware of the sexual assault occurring;
 (6) intentionally impairs a victim’s power to appraise/control his/her conduct by  administering any 
substance, without the victim’s knowledge;
 (8) is a public servant who coerces the victim to submit or participate;
 (9) is a mental health or health care services provider who exploits a victim (current or past patient) 
to submit or participate due to his/her emotional dependency on the actor
 22.011 Sexual Assault Definitions (c) 
(2)  "Spouse" means a person who is legally married to another. 
(3)  "Health care services provider" means:
 (A)  a physician licensed under Subtitle B, Title 3, Occupations Code;
 (B)  a chiropractor licensed under Chapter 201, Occupations Code;
 (C)  a physical therapist licensed under Chapter 453, Occupations Code;
 (D)  a physician assistant licensed under Chapter 204, Occupations Code;  or
 (E)  a registered nurse, a vocational nurse, or an advanced practice nurse 
licensed under Chapter 301, Occupations Code.
 22.011 Sexual Assault Definitions (c) 
(4)  "Mental health services provider" an individual, licensed/unlicensed, who performs or 
purports to perform mental health services, including: 
(A)  licensed social worker, defined by Section 505.002, Occupations Code;
 (B)  chemical dependency counselor under 504.001, Occupations Code
 (C)  licensed professional counselor under 503.002, Occupations Code;
 (D)  licensed marriage & family therapist under 502.002;
 (E)  member of the clergy;
 (F) psychologist offering psychological services under 501.003; or
 (G) special officer for mental health assignment under 1701.404. 
(5) "Employee of a facility" means a person who is an employee of a facility defined by 
Section 250.001, Health and Safety Code, or any other person who provides services 
for a facility for compensation, including a contract laborer.
 (5) the other person has not consented and the actor knows the other person 
is unaware that the sexual assault is occurring; 
(6) the actor has intentionally impaired the other person's power to appraise 
or control the other person's conduct by administering any substance without 
the other person's knowledge; 
(8) the actor is a public servant who coerces the other person to submit or 
participate; 
(9) the actor is a mental health services provider or a health care services 
provider who causes the other person, who is a patient or former patient of 
the actor, to submit or participate by exploiting the other person's emotional 
dependency on the actor; 
(c) In this section: 
(2) "Spouse" means a person who is legally married to another. 
(3) "Health care services provider" means: 
(A) a physician licensed under Subtitle B, Title 3, Occupations Code; 
(B) a chiropractor licensed under Chapter 201, Occupations Code; 
(C) a physical therapist licensed under Chapter 453, Occupations Code; 
(D) a physician assistant licensed under Chapter 204, Occupations Code; or 
(E) a registered nurse, a vocational nurse, or an advanced practice nurse 
licensed under Chapter 301, Occupations Code. 
(4) "Mental health services provider" means an individual, licensed or 
unlicensed, who performs or purports to perform mental health services, 
including a: 
(A) licensed social worker as defined by Section 505.002, Occupations Code; 
(B) chemical dependency counselor as defined by Section 504.001, 
Occupations Code; 
(C) licensed professional counselor as defined by Section 503.002, 
Occupations Code; 
(D) licensed marriage and family therapist as defined by Section 502.002, 
Occupations Code; 
(E) member of the clergy; 
(F) psychologist offering psychological services as defined by Section 501.003, 
Occupations Code; or 
(G) special officer for mental health assignment certified under Section 
1701.404, Occupations Code. 
(5) "Employee of a facility" means a person who is an employee of a facility 
defined by Section 250.001, Health and Safety Code, or any other person who 
provides services for a facility for compensation, including a contract laborer. 
SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (b)
 Conduct is without consent if the actor is:
 (10) a clergyman who exploits a victim to submit or 
participate from the emotional dependency on a clergy’s 
professional character as a spiritual adviser;
 (11) an employee of a facility where the victim resides, 
unless formally/informally married to each other
 (12) is a health care services provider who, performs a 
reproduction procedure on the victim, knowingly uses a 
donor’s human reproductive material from whom the 
victim has not expressly consented
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 SJF (f) (2)
 22.011 Sexual Assault Definitions (c) 
(6) "Assisted reproduction" and "donor" have the meanings 
assigned by Section 160.102, Family Code.
 (7) "Human reproductive material" means:
 (A) a human spermatozoon or ovum; or
 (B) a human organism at any stage of development from 
fertilized ovum to embryo.
 SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (b)
 Conduct is without consent if the actor is:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (13) a coach or tutor who causes the other person to submit or participate by using the actor's power 
or influence to exploit the other person's dependency on the actor; or
 (14) a caregiver hired to assist the other person with activities of daily life and causes the other person 
to submit or participate by exploiting the other person's dependency on the actor.
 AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT: 
22.021 (a) (2) (A)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (1) Commits sexual assault AND:
 (i) causes SBI or attempts to cause death of a victim or 
another in the same crim. episode;
 (ii-iii) by acts/words cause a victim to fear or threatens in 
the victim’s presence that: 
• anyone will be a victim of 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) 
or 
• fear of death, SBI, or kidnapping will be imminently 
inflicted on any person; or
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 1°F
 (d) Defense that the conduct consisted of 
medical care & did not include any contact 
between the child’s anus or sexual organ 
and mouth, anus, or sexual organ of the 
actor or 3rd party.
 • threat of any’s death, SBI, or kidnapping;
 (iv) uses or exhibits a deadly weapon in the same criminal 
episode;
 (10) the actor is a clergyman who causes the other person to submit or 
participate by exploiting the other person's emotional dependency on the 
clergyman in the clergyman's professional character as spiritual adviser; 
(11) the actor is an employee of a facility where the other person is a 
resident, unless the employee and resident are formally or informally married 
to each other under Chapter 2, Family Code; 
(12) the actor is a health care services provider who, in the course of 
performing an assisted reproduction procedure on the other person, uses 
human reproductive material from a donor knowing that the other person 
has not expressly consented to the use of material from that donor; 
(f) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that 
an offense under this section is: 
(2) a state jail felony if the offense is committed under Subsection (a)(1) and 
the actor has not received express consent as described by Subsection 
(b)(12). 
(6) "Assisted reproduction" and "donor" have the meanings assigned by 
Section 160.102, Family Code. 
(7) "Human reproductive material" means: 
(A) a human spermatozoon or ovum; or 
(B) a human organism at any stage of development from fertilized ovum to 
embryo. 
(13) the actor is a coach or tutor who causes the other person to submit or 
participate by using the actor's power or influence to exploit the other 
person's dependency on the actor; or 
(14) the actor is a caregiver hired to assist the other person with activities of 
daily life and causes the other person to submit or participate by exploiting 
the other person's dependency on the actor. 
Sec. 22.021.  AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT.   
(a)  A person commits a sexual assault offense and: 
(2)  if: 
(A)  the person: 
(i)  causes serious bodily injury or attempts to cause the death of 
the victim or another person in the course of the same criminal 
episode; 
(ii)  by acts or words places the victim in fear that any person will 
become the victim of an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), 
(7), or (8) or that death, serious bodily injury, or kidnapping will 
be imminently inflicted on any person; 
(iii)  by acts or words occurring in the presence of the victim 
threatens to cause any person to become the victim of an offense 
under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) or to cause the death, 
serious bodily injury, or kidnapping of any person; 
(iv)  uses or exhibits a deadly weapon in the course of the same 
criminal episode; 
AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT: 
22.021 (a) (2) (A-C)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Commits sexual assault AND:
 (v) acts in concert with another toward the same victim & same criminal 
episode; or
 (vi) with the intent of facilitating the sexual assault, administers or 
provides a victim any substance capable of impairing their ability to 
appraise or resist the act’s nature;
 (C) the victim was elderly or disabled
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 1°F
 Consent, It’s As Simple as Tea
 Child Victims
 21.11. INDECENCY WITH A CHILD
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) with a child under 17, AND regardless of whether the 
actor knows the child’s age:
 (1) engages in sexual contact with or causes the child to 
engage in sexual contact; or
 (2) with intent to arouse/gratify sexual desire of any person:
 (A) exposes the person's anus or any part of the person's 
genitals, knowing the child is present; or
 (B) causes the child to expose their anus/any genitals part
 (c) sexual contact = with intent to arouse/gratify sexual desire:
 (1) any touching, including through clothing, of the anus, 
breast, or any part of the genitals of a child;  or
 (2) any child’s body part touching, including thru clothing, 
with the anus, breast, or any genitals part of a person.
 d) 3°F for (a) (2) 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 d) 2°F for (a) (1)
 (b) affirmative defense if the actor:
 (1) was opposite sex & not > 3 years older;
 (2) did not use duress, force, or threat; AND
 (3) (A) was not required to register for life 
under CCP 62 (sex offender);  or
 (B) Had a reportable CCP 62 conviction or 
adjudication under this section.
 (b-1) affirmative defense if the actor was the 
spouse of the child at the time of the offense.
 (d)  The defense provided by Section 22.011(d) applies to this section. 
(e)  An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree. 
Sec. 22.021.  AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT.   
(a)  A person commits Sexual assault offense and: 
(2)  if: 
(A)  the person: 
(v)  acts in concert with another who engages in conduct described by 
Subdivision (1) directed toward the same victim and occurring 
during the course of the same criminal episode; or 
(vi)  with the intent of facilitating the commission of the offense, 
administers or provides to the victim of the offense any 
substance capable of impairing the victim's ability to appraise the 
nature of the act or to resist the act; or 
(C)  the victim is an elderly individual or a disabled individual. 
Show Video 
21.11. INDECENCY WITH A CHILD.  
(a) A person commits an offense if, with a child younger than 17 years of age, 
whether the child is of the same or opposite sex and regardless of whether 
the person knows the age of the child at the time of the offense, the person: 
(1) engages in sexual contact with the child or causes the child to engage in 
sexual contact; or 
(2) with intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person: 
(A) exposes the person's anus or any part of the person's genitals, knowing 
the child is present; or 
(B) causes the child to expose the child's anus or any part of the child's 
genitals. 
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the 
actor: 
(1) was not more than three years older than the victim and of the opposite 
sex; 
(2) did not use duress, force, or a threat against the victim at the time of the 
offense; and 
(3) at the time of the offense: 
(A) was not required under Chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, to 
register for life as a sex offender; or 
(B) was not a person who under Chapter 62 had a reportable conviction or 
adjudication for an offense under this section. 
(b-1) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the 
actor was the spouse of the child at the time of the offense. 
(c) In this section, "sexual contact" means the following acts, if committed 
with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person: 
(1) any touching by a person, including touching through clothing, of the 
anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of a child; or 
(2) any touching of any part of the body of a child, including touching through 
clothing, with the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of a person. 
SEXUAL ASSAULT: 22.011 (a) (2)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (c)(1) "Child" = younger than 17
 intentionally or knowingly, regardless of 
knowledge of the child’s age:
 (A-B) causes the penetration of the child’: anus/sexual 
organ by any means or mouth by the sexual organ of the 
actor;
 (C) causes the child’s sexual organ to contact or 
penetrate the mouth, anus, or sexual organ of another, 
including the actor;
 Defense Arguments & Enhancements
 2°F
 (d) Defense the conduct consisted of medical 
care & did not include any contact between the 
child’s anus/sexual organ and mouth, 
anus/sexual organ of the actor or 3rd party.
 (D) causes the child’s anus to contact the mouth, anus, 
or sexual organ of another; or
 (E)  causes the child’s mouth to contact the anus or 
sexual organ of another person.
 (e) affirmative defense that the:
 * actor was the child’s spouse; or
 * actor was not > 3 years older & * no Ch 62 life 
report or a report-able conv/adjud under this 
sec &
 * victim was 14 or older & NOT prohibited 
under 25.01 or 25.02
 (d) An offense under Subsection (a)(1) is a felony of the second degree and an 
offense under Subsection (a)(2) is a felony of the third degree. 
(c) In this section: 
(1) "Child" means a person younger than 17 years of age. 
Sec. 22.011. SEXUAL ASSAULT. (a) A person commits an offense if: 
(2) regardless of whether the person knows the age of the child at the time of 
the offense, the person intentionally or knowingly: 
(A) causes the penetration of the anus or sexual organ of a child by any 
means; 
(B) causes the penetration of the mouth of a child by the sexual organ of the 
actor; 
(C) causes the sexual organ of a child to contact or penetrate the mouth, 
anus, or sexual organ of another person, including the actor; 
(D) causes the anus of a child to contact the mouth, anus, or sexual organ of 
another person, including the actor; or 
(E) causes the mouth of a child to contact the anus or sexual organ of another 
person, including the actor. 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) that the conduct 
consisted of medical care for the child and did not include any contact 
between the anus or sexual organ of the child and the mouth, anus, or sexual 
organ of the actor or a third party. 
(e) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2): 
(1) that the actor was the spouse of the child at the time of the offense; or 
(2) that: 
(A) the actor was not more than three years older than the victim and at the 
t
 ime of the offense: 
(i) was not required under Chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, to register 
for life as a sex offender; or 
(ii) was not a person who under Chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, had 
a reportable conviction or adjudication for an offense under this section; and 
(B) the victim: 
(i) was a child of 14 years of age or older; and 
(ii) was not: 
(a) a person whom the actor was prohibited from marrying or purporting to 
marry or with whom the actor was prohibited from living under the 
appearance of being married under Section 25.01; or 
(b) a person with whom the actor was prohibited from engaging in sexual 
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse under Section 25.02. 
AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT: 
22.021 (a) (2) (A-C)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Commits sexual assault AND:
 (B) the victim is younger than 14, regardless of 
knowing the victim’s age.
 1°F
 Defense Arguments & Enhancements
 "Super" Aggravated
 (f) Minimum imprisonment is increased to 25 years 
if:
 (1) victim is younger than 6; or
 (2) victim is younger than 14 years & the actor 
commits it under (a)(2)(A) of this section. 
(SBI,Threat etc..)
 22.021 Aggravated Sexual Assault definitions
 (1) "Child" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.011(c).(Sexual assault - Age < 17)
 (2) ""Elderly individual" and "disabled individual" have the meanings assigned by Section 
22.04(c). (Injury to a child/elderly/disabled individual)
 (3) "Disabled individual" means a person older than 13 years of age who by reason of age or 
physical or mental disease, defect, or injury is substantially unable to protect the person's 
self from harm or to provide food, shelter, or medical care for the person's self.
 Sec. 22.021.  AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT.   
(a)  A person commits Sexual assault offense and: 
(2)  if: 
(B)  the victim is younger than 14 years of age, regardless of whether 
the person knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense; 
or 
"Super" Aggravated Sexual Assault 
(f)  The minimum term of imprisonment for an offense under this section is 
increased to 25 years if: 
(1)  the victim of the offense is younger than six years of age at the time the 
offense is committed; or 
(2)  the victim of the offense is younger than 14 years of age at the time the 
offense is committed and the actor commits the offense in a manner 
described by Subsection (a)(2)(A). 
Sec. 22.021. Continued 
(1)  "Child" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.011(c).(Sexual assault - Age < 17) 
(2)  ""Elderly individual" and "disabled individual" have the meanings 
assigned by Section 22.04(c). (Injury to a child/elderly/disabled individual) 
(3) "Disabled individual" means a person older than 13 years of age who by 
reason of age or physical or mental disease, defect, or injury is substantially 
unable to protect the person's self from harm or to provide food, shelter, or 
medical care for the person's self. 
21.02.  CONTINUOUS SEXUAL ABUSE OF YOUNG 
CHILD OR CHILDREN
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) (1) during a 30-or-more day period, commits 2/+ sex abuse 
acts, regardless of them being against one or more victims; &
 (2) at the time, the actor is 17 or older and the victim is:
 (A) Under 14 years of age, regardless of actor knowing 
the age or 
(B) a disabled individual.
 (c) Act of sexual abuse = violation of 1 or more these PC laws:
 (1) Agg kind. 20.04(a)(4)+intent to sexually violate/abuse; (2)  
indecency with a child 21.11(a)(1), other than by touching; (3)  
sexual assault 22.011; (4) aggravated sexual assault 22.021; 
(5) burglary 30.02 (d) & intent of (1-4); (6) sex performance 
by a child 43.25; (7)  trafficking of persons 20A.02(a)(3), (4), 
or (7-8); & 42.05 (8) compelling prostitution
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 h) 1°F: life or 25 to 99 years
 a) Child = younger than 17
 d) Juries are not required to agree unanimously on 
specific acts/exact date but must on that 2 or more 
acts during a period, 30 or more days in duration.
 (e) May not convict an actor in the same criminal 
action for a (c) offense if the victim is the same 
being alleged under (b) unless the (c) offense is:
 (1) is charged in the alternative;
 (2) occurred outside the alleged period for (b); or
 (3) Fact trier considers it to be a lesser included 
offense for the alleged one in (b).
 (f) May not charge with more than one count of 
(b), if all specific acts are alleged to 1 victim
 21.02. CONTINUOUS SEXUAL ABUSE OF YOUNG CHILD OR DISABLED 
INDIVIDUAL. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Child" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.011(c). 
(2) "Disabled individual" has the meaning assigned by Section 22.021(b). 
(b) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) during a period that is 30 or more days in duration, the person commits 
two or more acts of sexual abuse, regardless of whether the acts of sexual 
abuse are committed against one or more victims; and 
(2) at the time of the commission of each of the acts of sexual abuse, the 
actor is 17 years of age or older and the victim is: 
(A) a child younger than 14 years of age, regardless of whether the actor 
knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense; or 
(B) a disabled individual. 
(c) For purposes of this section, "act of sexual abuse" means any act that is a 
violation of one or more of the following penal laws: 
(1) aggravated kidnapping under Section 20.04(a)(4), if the actor committed 
the offense with the intent to violate or abuse the victim sexually; 
(2) indecency with a child under Section 21.11(a)(1), if the actor committed 
the offense in a manner other than by touching, including touching through 
clothing, the breast of a child; 
(3) sexual assault under Section 22.011; 
(4) aggravated sexual assault under Section 22.021; 
(5) burglary under Section 30.02, if the offense is punishable under 
Subsection (d) of that section and the actor committed the offense with the 
intent to commit an offense listed in Subdivisions (1)-(4); 
(6) sexual performance by a child under Section 43.25; 
(7) trafficking of persons under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8); and 
(8) compelling prostitution under Section 43.05. 
(d) If a jury is the trier of fact, members of the jury are not required to agree 
unanimously on which specific acts of sexual abuse were committed by the 
defendant or the exact date when those acts were committed. The jury must 
agree unanimously that the defendant, during a period that is 30 or more 
days in duration, committed two or more acts of sexual abuse. 
(e) A defendant may not be convicted in the same criminal action of an 
offense listed under Subsection (c) the victim of which is the same victim as a 
victim of the offense alleged under Subsection (b) unless the offense listed in 
Subsection (c): 
(1) is charged in the alternative; 
(2) occurred outside the period in which the offense alleged under Subsection 
(b) was committed; or 
(3) is considered by the trier of fact to be a lesser included offense of the 
offense alleged under Subsection (b). 
(f) A defendant may not be charged with more than one count under 
Subsection (b) if all of the specific acts of sexual abuse that are alleged to 
have been committed are alleged to have been committed against a single 
victim. 
Affirmative Defense for Continuous 21.02(g)
 (1) Actor was not more than five years older than:
 (A)  the victim, if committed against only one victim; or
 (B)  the youngest victim, if the offense is alleged against more than one victim;
 (2)  did not use duress, force, or a threat against a victim at the time of any of the acts; and
 (3)  at the time of the acts (A) was not required to register for life as a sex offender under CCP 62; 
or (B) had a reportable conviction/adjudication under this section or a sex abuse act in (c)
 (h) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree, punishable by 
imprisonment in the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for life, or for any 
term of not more than 99 years or less than 25 years. 
(g)  With respect to a prosecution under this section involving only one or 
more victims described by Subsection (b)(2)(A), it is an affirmative defense to 
prosecution under this section that the actor: 
(1)  was not more than five years older than: 
(A)  the victim of the offense, if the offense is alleged to have been committed 
against only one victim; or 
(B)  the youngest victim of the offense, if the offense is alleged to have been 
committed against more than one victim; 
(2)  did not use duress, force, or a threat against a victim at the time of the 
commission of any of the acts of sexual abuse alleged as an element of the 
offense; and 
(3)  at the time of the commission of any of the acts of sexual abuse alleged as 
an element of the offense: 
(A)  was not required under Chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, to 
register for life as a sex offender; or 
38.17.  FAILURE TO STOP OR REPORT 
AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT OF CHILD
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) Except one with a 22.04(b) duty relationship with a child: 
(1) observes the commission/attempted of 21.02 (continuous)  
/ 22.021(a)(2)(B) (Agg Sex Assault under 14 vic) when a 
reasonable person would believe a sexual/assaultive offense 
was being/about to be committed against the child;
 (2) fails to assist the child or immediately report the offense to 
a peace officer or law enforcement agency; AND
 (3) actor could assist the child/immediately report it without 
placing the actor in danger of SBI or death.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Class A
 21.12.  IMPROPER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
EDUCATOR AND STUDENT
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 c) Stackable
 (a) Is a public/private primary/secondary school employee &:
 (1) engages in sexual contact/intercourse/deviate intercourse 
with one enrolled in the same school;
 (2) holds EC 21.003 certificate, permit, license, or credential 
position, regardless of holding it, & engages in sexual contact 
/intercourse/deviate intercourse with one known:
 (A) to be enrolled in a public/private primary/secondary 
school, other than their own covered by (1); or
 (B) student participant in an educational activity, sponsored 
by a school district or public/private primary/secondary 
school, if enrolled students are the primary participants; or
 (3) engages in 33.021 (online solicitation), with one in (1) or 
a known person in (2)(A) or (B), regardless of the person’s age
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 b) 2°F
 (b-1) Affirmative defense if:
 (1) victim was the actor’s spouse at the time; or
 (2) actor was not more than 3 years older AND, at 
the time, they were in a relationship that began 
before the actor's employment
 (e) Sexual contact = if committed with the intent to 
arouse or gratify sexual desire: (1) any employee 
touching of the anus, breast, or any genital part of 
an enrolled person or student participant, or
 (2) any touching of any body part of the enrolled or 
participant with the anus, breast, or any genital 
part of the employee.
 (B)  was not a person who under Chapter 62 had a reportable conviction or 
adjudication for an offense under this section or an act of sexual abuse as 
described by Subsection (c). 
22.04(b)  - an omission that causes a condition by (a)(1-3) or (a-1)(1-3) if: (1) 
the actor has a legal or statutory duty to act; or 
(2) the actor has assumed care, custody, or control of a child, elderly 
individual, or disabled individual. 
21.02 Continuous Sexual Abuse of Young Child(ren) 
22.02 a2B – victim under 14 
Sec. 38.17.  FAILURE TO STOP OR REPORT AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT 
OF CHILD.   
(a)  A person, other than a person who has a relationship with a child 
described by Section 22.04(b), commits an offense if: 
(1)  the actor observes the commission or attempted commission of an 
offense prohibited by Section 21.02 or 22.021(a)(2)(B) under 
circumstances in which a reasonable person would believe that an 
offense of a sexual or assaultive nature was being committed or was 
about to be committed against the child; 
(2)  the actor fails to assist the child or immediately report the 
commission of the offense to a peace officer or law enforcement 
agency; and 
(3)  the actor could assist the child or immediately report the 
commission of the offense without placing the actor in danger of 
suffering serious bodily injury or death. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor. 
Sec. 21.12. IMPROPER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EDUCATOR AND STUDENT. 
(a) An employee of a public or private primary or secondary school commits 
an offense if the employee: 
(1) engages in sexual contact, sexual intercourse, or deviate sexual 
intercourse with a person who is enrolled in a public or private primary or 
secondary school at which the employee works; 
(2) holds a position described by Section 21.003(a) or (b), Education Code, 
regardless of whether the employee holds the appropriate certificate, permit, 
license, or credential for the position, and engages in sexual contact, sexual 
intercourse, or deviate sexual intercourse with a person the employee knows 
is: 
(A) enrolled in a public or private primary or secondary school, other than a 
school described by Subdivision (1); or 
(B) a student participant in an educational activity that is sponsored by a 
school district or a public or private primary or secondary school, if students 
enrolled in a public or private primary or secondary school are the primary 
participants in the activity; or 
(3) engages in conduct described by Section 33.021, with a person described 
by Subdivision (1), or a person the employee knows is a person described by 
Subdivision (2)(A) or (B), regardless of the age of that person. 
(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree. 
(b-1) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the actor was the spouse of the enrolled person at the time of the offense; 
or 
(2) the actor was not more than three years older than the enrolled person 
and, at the time of the offense, the actor and the enrolled person were in a 
relationship that began before the actor's employment at a public or private 
primary or secondary school. 
(c) If conduct constituting an offense under this section also constitutes an 
offense under another section of this code, the actor may be prosecuted 
under either section or both sections. 
(d) The name of a person who is enrolled in a public or private primary or 
secondary school and involved in an improper relationship with an educator 
as provided by Subsection (a) may not be released to the public and is not 
public information under Chapter 552, Government Code. 
(d-1) Except as otherwise provided by this subsection, a public or private 
primary or secondary school, or a person or entity that operates a public or 
private primary or secondary school, may not release externally to the 
general public the name of an employee of the school who is accused of 
committing an offense under this section until the employee is indicted for 
the offense. The school, or the person or entity that operates the school, may 
release the name of the accused employee regardless of whether the 
employee has been indicted for the offense as necessary for the school to: 
(1) report the accusation: 
(A) to the Texas Education Agency, another state agency, or local law 
enforcement or as otherwise required by law; or 
(B) to the school's members or community in accordance with the school's 
policies or procedures or with the religious law observed by the school; or 
(2) conduct an investigation of the accusation. 
(e) In this section, "sexual contact" means the following acts, if committed 
with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person: 
(1) any touching by an employee of a public or private primary or secondary 
school of the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of: 
(A) an enrolled person described by Subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)(A); or 
(B) a student participant described by Subsection (a)(2)(B); or 
(2) any touching of any part of the body of the enrolled person or student 
participant with the anus, breast, or any part of the genitals of the employee. 
21.12 Improper Relationship between Educator and Student
 (d) The name of an enrolled person and involved in this offense may not be released to the public and is not 
public information under Chapter 552, Government Code.
 (d-1) Public/private primary/secondary school, person, or entity that operates one of these, may not release 
externally to the general public the name of an accused school employee until they have been indicted 
They may release the accused’s name regardless of indictment in order to: (1)  report the accusation: 
(A) to the Texas Education Agency, another state agency, or local law enforcement or as otherwise 
required by law; or
 (B) to the school's members or community in accordance with the school's policies or procedures or with 
the religious law observed by the school; or
 (2) conduct an investigation of the accusation.
 Sec. 21.12. IMPROPER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EDUCATOR AND STUDENT.. 
(d) The name of a person who is enrolled in a public or private primary or 
secondary school and involved in an improper relationship with an educator 
as provided by Subsection (a) may not be released to the public and is not 
public information under Chapter 552, Government Code. 
(d-1) Except as otherwise provided by this subsection, a public or private 
primary or secondary school, or a person or entity that operates a public or 
private primary or secondary school, may not release externally to the 
general public the name of an employee of the school who is accused of 
committing an offense under this section until the employee is indicted for 
the offense. The school, or the person or entity that operates the school, may 
release the name of the accused employee regardless of whether the 
employee has been indicted for the offense as necessary for the school to: 
33.021.  ONLINE SOLICITATION OF A MINOR Definitions
 (1)  "Minor" means:
 (A)  an individual who is younger than 17 years of age; or
 (B) an individual whom the actor believes to be younger than 17 years of age.
 (3)  "Sexually explicit" means any communication, language, or material, including a photographic or video 
image, that relates to or describes sexual conduct, as defined by Section 43.25 Sexual Performance by a 
Child
 33.021.  ONLINE SOLICITATION OF A MINOR
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 g) Stackable
 (b) 17 or older with the intent to commit an offense in CCP  
62.001(5)(A-B) or (K) (Continuous SA, Indecency, Sex Assault, 
Agg sex Assault, Proh. sex conduct) intentionally:
 Over the Internet, by electronic mail, text, or other electronic 
message service/system, or a commercial online service:
 (1) communicates in a sexually explicit manner w/ a minor; or
 (2) distributes sexually explicit material to a minor. OR
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) knowingly solicits a minor to meet another/the actor, with 
intent the minor will engage in sexual contact/intercourse or 
deviate sexual intercourse with the actor or another.
 (d) NO defense for (c) if the meeting did not occur
 (e) Defense for (c) if:
 (1) the actor was married to the minor; or 
(2) not more than 3 years older & w/ consent
 f) 3rd degree for (b) except
 f) 2nd Degree for (b) if the minor is younger 
than 14 or the actor believes them to be
 f) 2nd Degree for a (c) offense
 f-1) Punishment is increased to the next higher 
the trial shows: (1) was during regular public/ 
private primary/secondary school hours; and
 (2) actor knew/reasonably should have that 
the minor was enrolled in the above
 (1) report the accusation: 
(A) to the Texas Education Agency, another state agency, or local law 
enforcement or as otherwise required by law; or 
(B) to the school's members or community in accordance with the school's 
policies or procedures or with the religious law observed by the school; or 
(2) conduct an investigation of the accusation. 
Sec. 33.021. ONLINE SOLICITATION OF A MINOR. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Minor" means: 
(A) an individual who is younger than 17 years of age; or 
(B) an individual whom the actor believes to be younger than 17 years of age. 
(2) "Sexual contact," "sexual intercourse," and "deviate sexual intercourse" 
have the meanings assigned by Section 21.01. 
(3) "Sexually explicit" means any communication, language, or material, 
including a photographic or video image, that relates to or describes sexual 
conduct, as defined by Section 43.25. 
****violation of Section 21.02 (Continuous sexual abuse of young child or 
children), 21.11 (Indecency with a child), 22.011 (Sexual assault), 22.021 
(Aggravated sexual assault), or 25.02 (Prohibited sexual conduct), Penal Code; 
(b) A person who is 17 years of age or older commits an offense if, with the 
intent to commit an offense listed in Article 62.001(5)(A), (B), or (K), Code of 
Criminal Procedure, the person, over the Internet, by electronic mail or text 
message or other electronic message service or system, or through a 
commercial online service, intentionally: 
(1) communicates in a sexually explicit manner with a minor; or 
(2) distributes sexually explicit material to a minor. 
(c) A person commits an offense if the person, over the Internet, by electronic 
mail or text message or other electronic message service or system, or 
through a commercial online service, knowingly solicits a minor to meet 
another person, including the actor, with the intent that the minor will 
engage in sexual contact, sexual intercourse, or deviate sexual intercourse 
with the actor or another person. 
(d) It is not a defense to prosecution under Subsection (c) that the meeting 
did not occur. 
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that at the time conduct 
described by Subsection (c) was committed: 
(1) the actor was married to the minor; or 
(2) the actor was not more than three years older than the minor and the 
minor consented to the conduct. 
(f) An offense under Subsection (b) is a felony of the third degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the second degree if the minor is younger than 14 
years of age or is an individual whom the actor believes to be younger than 
14 years of age at the time of the commission of the offense. An offense 
under Subsection (c) is a felony of the second degree. 
(f-1) The punishment for an offense under this section is increased to the 
punishment prescribed for the next higher category of offense if it is shown 
on the trial of the offense that: 
(1) the actor committed the offense during regular public or private primary 
or secondary school hours; and 
(2) the actor knew or reasonably should have known that the minor was 
enrolled in a public or private primary or secondary school at the time of the 
offense. 
43.25 SEXUAL PERFORMANCE BY A CHILD (a)
 (1) Sexual performance = any performance/part that includes sexual conduct by a child younger than 18
 (2) Sexual conduct = contact, actual/simulated sexual/deviate intercourse, bestiality, masturbation, S&M 
abuse, or lewd exhibition of genitals, anus, or female breast below top of areola 
(3) Performance=any play, motion picture, photo, dance, or other visuals that can be shown to 1 or more 
(4) Produce = for sexual performance, any conduct directly contributing to the sexual performance 
creation/manufacture 
(5) Promote = procure, manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, 
distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise/offer/agree to do any of the above.
 (6) Simulated = explicit depiction of sexual conduct that creates the appearance of actual sexual conduct 
and while engaging in the conduct exhibits any uncovered portion of the breasts, genitals, or buttocks.
 43.25. SEXUAL PERFORMANCE BY A CHILD
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) knowing the character & content: employs, induces, or 
authorizes under 18 to engage in sexual conduct/performance  
Parent/legal guardian/custodian of an under 18 commits an 
offense if (s)he consents to a sexual performance
 (d) knowing the character & content: he produces, directs, or 
promotes an under 18 sex conduct performance
 (h) Offense regardless of knowing the age of the victim
 (g) To determine if a child is under 18, the court/ jury may: 
(1) personal inspection of the child;
 (2) inspection of the performance’s photo/motion picture;
 (3) testimony on age appearance by a performance witness;
 (4) expert medical testimony on the child’s appearance; or
 (5) any other method authorized by law or common law.
 Defense Arguments & 
Punishments
 c) 2nd Degree except
 f) 1st Degree for victim under 14, regardless of 
knowing their age
 (f) Affirmative defense: (1) defendant was a spouse: 
(2) Bona fide educational, medical, psychological, 
psychiatric, judicial, LE, or legislative purpose; or
 (3) Defendant, not more than two years older
 (g) If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under any other law, the actor may be prosecuted under this 
section, the other law, or both. 
43.25. SEXUAL PERFORMANCE BY A CHILD. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Sexual performance" means any performance or part thereof that 
includes sexual conduct by a child younger than 18 years of age. 
(2) "Sexual conduct" means sexual contact, actual or simulated sexual 
intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual bestiality, masturbation, sado
masochistic abuse, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, the anus, or any portion 
of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
(3) "Performance" means any play, motion picture, photograph, dance, or 
other visual representation that can be exhibited before an audience of one 
or more persons. 
(4) "Produce" with respect to a sexual performance includes any conduct that 
directly contributes to the creation or manufacture of the sexual 
performance. 
(5) "Promote" means to procure, manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, 
mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, 
present, exhibit, or advertise or to offer or agree to do any of the above. 
(6) "Simulated" means the explicit depiction of sexual conduct that creates 
the appearance of actual sexual conduct and during which a person engaging 
in the conduct exhibits any uncovered portion of the breasts, genitals, or 
buttocks. 
(7) "Deviate sexual intercourse" and "sexual contact" have the meanings 
assigned by Section 43.01. 
43.25. SEXUAL PERFORMANCE BY A CHILD. (a) In this section: 
(b) A person commits an offense if, knowing the character and content 
thereof, he employs, authorizes, or induces a child younger than 18 years of 
age to engage in sexual conduct or a sexual performance. A parent or legal 
guardian or custodian of a child younger than 18 years of age commits an 
offense if he consents to the participation by the child in a sexual 
performance. 
(c) An offense under Subsection (b) is a felony of the second degree, except 
that the offense is a felony of the first degree if the victim is younger than 14 
years of age at the time the offense is committed, regardless of whether the 
actor knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense. 
(d) A person commits an offense if, knowing the character and content of the 
material, he produces, directs, or promotes a performance that includes 
sexual conduct by a child younger than 18 years of age. 
(e) An offense under Subsection (d) is a felony of the third degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the second degree if the victim is younger than 14 
years of age at the time the offense is committed, regardless of whether the 
actor knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense. 
(f) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the defendant was the spouse of the child at the time of the offense; 
(2) the conduct was for a bona fide educational, medical, psychological, 
psychiatric, judicial, law enforcement, or legislative purpose; or 
(3) the defendant is not more than two years older than the child. 
(g) When it becomes necessary for the purposes of this section or Section 
43.26 to determine whether a child who participated in sexual conduct was 
younger than 18 years of age, the court or jury may make this determination 
by any of the following methods: 
(1) personal inspection of the child; 
(2) inspection of the photograph or motion picture that shows the child 
engaging in the sexual performance; 
(3) oral testimony by a witness to the sexual performance as to the age of the 
child based on the child's appearance at the time; 
(4) expert medical testimony based on the appearance of the child engaging 
in the sexual performance; or 
(5) any other method authorized by law or by the rules of evidence at 
common law. 
(h) Conduct under this section constitutes an offense regardless of whether 
the actor knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense. 
CCP 62: Sex Offender Registration Program
 CCP 62.051 The person shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection not 
later than the later of: 
• the 7th day after the person's arrival in the municipality or county; or 
• 1st date local law enforcement by policy allows the person to register or verify registration
 62.102.  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REGISTRATION 
REQUIREMENTS
 SJF: if the actor’s duty to register is 10 years
 3°F: duty to register for life and is required to verify registration once each year
 2°F: duty to register for life and is required to verify once each 90-day period
 Next higher punishment level for previous convictions or using fraudulent ID info
 32.15  
Sex Offender Registration:  
• Code of Criminal Procedure Chapter 62. Sex Offender Registration Program  
• Code of Criminal Procedure Chapter 62.051 Registration(a) - The person 
shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection not later than the later of: 
the seventh day after the person's arrival in the municipality or county; or the 
f
 irst date the local law enforcement authority of the municipality or county by 
policy allows the person to register or verify registration, as applicable.  
Art. 62.102. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS. (a) A 
person commits an offense if the person is required to register and fails to 
comply with any requirement of this chapter. 
(b) An offense under this article is: 
(1) a state jail felony if the actor is a person whose duty to register expires 
under Article 62.101(b) or (c); 
(2) a felony of the third degree if the actor is a person whose duty to register 
expires under Article 62.101(a) and who is required to verify registration once 
each year under Article 62.058; and 
(3) a felony of the second degree if the actor is a person whose duty to 
register expires under Article 62.101(a) and who is required to verify 
registration once each 90-day period under Article 62.058. 
(c) If it is shown at the trial of a person for an offense or an attempt to 
commit an offense under this article that the person has previously been 
convicted of an offense or an attempt to commit an offense under this article, 
the punishment for the offense or the attempt to commit the offense is 
increased to the punishment for the next highest degree of felony. 
(d) If it is shown at the trial of a person for an offense under this article or an 
attempt to commit an offense under this article that the person fraudulently 
used identifying information in violation of Section 32.51, Penal Code, during 
the commission or attempted commission of the offense, the punishment for 
43.251. EMPLOYMENT HARMFUL TO CHILDREN
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) In this section: "Child" means a person younger than 21 
years of age.
 (b) employs, authorizes, or induces a child to work:
 (1) in a sexually oriented commercial activity; or
 (2) in any place of business permitting, requesting, or requiring a 
child to work nude or topless.
 2°F
 1°F if u14
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (4) "Nude" means a child who is: entirely unclothed; 
or clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or 
visible through less than fully opaque clothing any 
portion of the breasts below the top of the areola of 
the breasts, if the child is female, or any portion of 
the genitals or buttocks.
 (5) "Sexually oriented commercial activity" means a 
massage establishment, nude or modeling studio, 
love parlor, or similar commercial enterprise the 
primary business of which is the offering of a 
service intended to provide sexual stimulation or 
gratification to the customer.
 (6) "Topless" means a female child clothed in a 
manner that leaves visible any portion of her breasts 
below the top of the areola.
 the offense or the attempt to commit the offense is increased to the 
punishment for the next highest degree of felony. 
Sec. 43.251. EMPLOYMENT HARMFUL TO CHILDREN. 
(a) In this section: 
(1) "Child" means a person younger than 21 years of age. 
(2) "Massage" has the meaning assigned to the term "massage therapy" by 
Section 455.001, Occupations Code. 
(3) "Massage establishment" has the meaning assigned by Section 455.001, 
Occupations Code. 
(4) "Nude" means a child who is: 
(A) entirely unclothed; or 
(B) clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or visible through less than 
fully opaque clothing any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola of 
the breasts, if the child is female, or any portion of the genitals or buttocks. 
(5) "Sexually oriented commercial activity" means a massage establishment, 
nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, or other similar commercial 
enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service that is 
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
(6) "Topless" means a female child clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered 
or visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of her breasts 
below the top of the areola. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person employs, authorizes, or induces 
a child to work: 
(1) in a sexually oriented commercial activity; or 
(2) in any place of business permitting, requesting, or requiring a child to work 
nude or topless. 
(c) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the first degree if the child is younger than 14 years 
of age at the time the offense is committed, regardless of whether the actor 
knows the age of the child at the time of the offense. 
(c) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the first degree if the victim is younger than 14 years 
of age at the time the offense is committed, regardless of whether the actor 
knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense. 
(d) Conduct under this section constitutes an offense regardless of whether 
the actor knows the age of the child at the time of the offense. 
(d) Conduct under this section constitutes an offense regardless of whether 
the actor knows the age of the victim at the time of the offense. 
Pornography and Sexual 
Recording Offenses
 Sexual Paraphilia Chart
 Type of Behavior
 Disorderly 
Conduct
 Voyeurism
 Public 
Lewdness
 Indecent 
Exposure
 Indecency with 
a Child
 Public Privacy Peeping
 ANUS/GENITALSexposure
 peeping on another to sexually 
arouse/gratify the actor
 Deviate or sexual intercourse; sexual 
contact
 Breach Type
 Lewd/unlawful
 Offended/alarmed, recklessly
 Offense Level
 C
 without consent of another in a 
dwelling/structure with a reasonable 
privacy expectation
 Knowingly in public or recklessly 
offends or alarms another
 exposes anus/genitals to sexually 
arouse/gratify the desire of another
 Indecent exposure/sexual contact w/ a 
child under 17
 reckless to offend or alarm another
 without coercion or > 3 years older or a 
spouse of the victim
 C
 State Jail if child 
victim
 A
 B
 2nd = contact 3rd = 
exposure
 21.15. INVASIVE VISUAL RECORDING: Definitions 
(1) "Female breast" any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola.
 (2) "Intimate area" naked or clothed genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or female breast
 (3) "Changing room" a room or portioned area provided for or primarily used for the changing 
of clothing and includes dressing rooms, locker rooms, and swimwear changing areas.
 (4) "Promote" 43.21. to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, 
transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or 
agree to do the same.
 21.15. INVASIVE VISUAL RECORDING 
Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) without consent & with intent to invade another’s privacy:
 (1) Photos or by videotape or other electronic means records, 
broadcasts, or transmits a visual image of an another’s 
intimate area, if the other has a reasonable expectation that 
the intimate area is not subject to public view;
 (2) Photos or by videotape/other electronic means records, 
broadcasts, or transmits another in a bath-changing room; or
 (3) knowing the character & content of the photo, recording, 
broadcast, or transmission, promotes a photo, recording, 
broadcast, or transmission described by (1) or (2).
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 c) SJF
 (e) For (b)(2), a sign/signs posted indicating that 
the person is being photographed or that a visual 
image is being recorded, broadcast, or transmitted 
is NOT sufficient to establish consent
 (1) "Female breast" any portion of the female breast below the top of the 
areola. 
(2) "Intimate area" naked or clothed genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or 
female breast 
(3) "Changing room" a room or portioned area provided for or primarily used 
for the changing of clothing and includes dressing rooms, locker rooms, and 
swimwear changing areas. 
(4) "Promote" 43.21. to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, 
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, 
exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, without the other person's consent and 
with intent to invade the privacy of the other person, the person: 
(1)  photographs or by videotape or other electronic means records, 
broadcasts, or transmits a visual image of an intimate area of another person 
if the other person has a reasonable expectation that the intimate area is not 
subject to public view; 
(2)  photographs or by videotape or other electronic means records, 
broadcasts, or transmits a visual image of another in a bathroom or changing 
room; or 
(3)  knowing the character and content of the photograph, recording, 
broadcast, or transmission, promotes a photograph, recording, broadcast, or 
transmission described by Subdivision (1) or (2). 
(c)  An offense under this section is a state jail felony. 
(d)  If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under any other law, the actor may be prosecuted under this 
section or the other law. 
(e)  For purposes of Subsection (b)(2), a sign or signs posted indicating that 
the person is being photographed or that a visual image of the person is being 
recorded, broadcast, or transmitted is not sufficient to establish the person's 
consent under that subdivision. 
21.16. UNLAWFUL DISCLOSURE OR PROMOTION OF 
INTIMATE VISUAL MATERIAL Definitions:
 (1) Intimate parts = the naked genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or female nipple of a person.
 (2) "Promote" means to procure, manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, 
transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise or to offer or 
agree to do any of the above.
 (3) "Sexual conduct" means sexual contact, actual or simulated sexual intercourse, deviate sexual 
intercourse, sexual bestiality, masturbation, or sadomasochistic abuse.
 4) "Simulated" explicit depiction of sexual conduct that creates the appearance of actual sexual 
conduct and during which a person engaging in the conduct exhibits any uncovered portion of the 
breasts, genitals, or buttocks.
 21.16 Unlawful Disclosure or Promotion of 
Intimate Visual Material Continued
 (5) "Visual material" means:
 (A) any film, photograph, videotape, negative, or slide or any photographic reproduction that 
contains or incorporates in any manner any film, photograph, videotape, negative, or slide; or
 (B) any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be displayed on a computer 
or other video screen and any image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone 
line, cable, satellite transmission, or other method.
 21.16. UNLAWFUL DISCLOSURE OR PROMOTION 
OF INTIMATE VISUAL MATERIAL
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 h) Stackable
 b)(1) without effective consent & with intent to harm, the 
actor discloses visual material depicting another with their  
intimate parts exposed or engaged in sexual conduct;
 (2) at the disclosure, the person knows/has reason to believe 
the visual material was obtained/created in a way the depicted 
had a reasonable expectation that it would remain private;
 (3) the disclosure causes harm to the depicted person; AND
 (4) disclosure reveals the depicted’s ID in anyway, including:
 (A) accompanying or subsequent related info/material; or
 (B) info/material provided by a third party in response to 
the disclosure
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 g) SJF
 (e) NOT a defense that the depicted (1) created or 
consented to the visual material creation; or (2) 
voluntarily transmitted the material to the actor.
 (f) Affirmative defense under (b) or (d) that:
 (1) the disclosure/promotion is during: 
(A) lawful/common LE or medical practices; 
(B) reporting unlawful activity; or 
(C) legal proceeding, if permitted/required by law;
 (2) disclosure/promotion depicting a public/ 
commercial setting, only voluntary exposure of: 
intimate parts or engaging in sexual conduct; or
 (3) Actor is an interactive computer service, & the 
disclosure/promotion was provided by another
 (1) Intimate parts = the naked genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, or female 
nipple of a person. 
(2) "Promote" means to procure, manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, 
mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, 
present, exhibit, or advertise or to offer or agree to do any of the above. 
(3) "Sexual conduct" means sexual contact, actual or simulated sexual 
intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual bestiality, masturbation, or 
sadomasochistic abuse. 
4) "Simulated" explicit depiction of sexual conduct that creates the 
appearance of actual sexual conduct and during which a person engaging in 
the conduct exhibits any uncovered portion of the breasts, genitals, or 
buttocks. 
(5) "Visual material" means: 
(A) any film, photograph, videotape, negative, or slide or any 
photographic reproduction that contains or incorporates in any 
manner any film, photograph, videotape, negative, or slide; or 
(B) any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an 
image to be displayed on a computer or other video screen and any 
image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by 
telephone line, cable, satellite transmission, or other method. 
21.16. UNLAWFUL DISCLOSURE OR PROMOTION OF INTIMATE VISUAL 
MATERIAL 
(b) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) without the effective consent of the depicted person and with the intent 
to harm that person, the person discloses visual material depicting another 
person with the person's intimate parts exposed or engaged in sexual 
conduct; 
(2) at the time of the disclosure, the person knows or has reason to believe 
that the visual material was obtained by the person or created under 
circumstances in which the depicted person had a reasonable expectation 
that the visual material would remain private; 
(3) the disclosure of the visual material causes harm to the depicted person; 
and 
(4) the disclosure of the visual material reveals the identity of the depicted 
person in any manner, including through: 
(A) any accompanying or subsequent information or material related to the 
visual material; or 
(B) information or material provided by a third party in response to the 
disclosure of the visual material. 
(e) It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the depicted 
person: 
(1) created or consented to the creation of the visual material; or  
(2) voluntarily transmitted the visual material to the actor. 
(f) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) or (d) that: 
(1) the disclosure or promotion is made in the course of: 
(A) lawful and common practices of law enforcement or medical treatment; 
(B) reporting unlawful activity; or 
(C) a legal proceeding, if the disclosure or promotion is permitted or required 
by law; 
(2) the disclosure or promotion consists of visual material depicting in a public 
or commercial setting only a person's voluntary exposure of: 
(A) the person's intimate parts; or 
(B) the person engaging in sexual conduct; or 
(3) the actor is an interactive computer service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. 
Section 230, and the disclosure or promotion consists of visual material 
provided by another person. 
(g) An offense under this section is a state jail felony. 
(h) If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under another law, the actor may be prosecuted under this 
section, the other law, or both. 
21.16. UNLAWFUL DISCLOSURE OR PROMOTION 
OF INTIMATE VISUAL MATERIAL
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 h) Stackable
 (c) intentionally threatens to disclose, w/o consent, visual 
material depicting one with intimate parts exposed/engaged 
in sexual conduct & makes a threat to obtain a benefit:
 (1)  in return for not making the disclosure; or 
(2)  in connection with the threatened disclosure.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 c) SJF
 (d)  knowing the character & content of the visual material, 
actor promotes visual material described by (b) for publication 
on an Internet website/other forum the actor owns/operates.
 (f) Affirmative defense under (b) or (d) that:
 (1) the disclosure/promotion is during: 
(A) lawful/common LE or medical practices; 
(B) reporting unlawful activity; or 
(C) legal proceeding, if permitted/required by law;
 (2) disclosure/promotion depicting a public/ 
commercial setting, only voluntary exposure of: 
intimate parts or engaging in sexual conduct; or
 (3) Actor is an interactive computer service, & the 
disclosure/promotion was provided by another
 21.19. UNLAWFUL ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF 
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT VISUAL MATERIAL.
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) knowingly transmits electronically visual material that:
 (1) depicts: 
(A)  any person engaging in sexual conduct or with the 
person's intimate parts exposed; or
 (B) covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; and
 (2) Not sent at the request of/express consent of the recipient.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 c) Class C 
**** Tyler Appellate Court concluded 21.16(b) to be 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL delivered April 18th, 2018 **** 
******Sep. 1, 2019, revised (1) and (2) in an attempt to "survive 
constitutional scrutiny" 
(c) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally threatens to 
disclose, without the consent of the depicted person, visual material 
depicting another person with the person's intimate parts exposed or 
engaged in sexual conduct and the actor makes the threat to obtain a benefit: 
(1) in return for not making the disclosure; or  
(2) in connection with the threatened disclosure. 
(d) A person commits an offense if, knowing the character and content of the 
visual material, the person promotes visual material described by Subsection 
(b) on an Internet website or other forum for publication that is owned or 
operated by the person. 
21.19. UNLAWFUL ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT VISUAL 
MATERIAL. (a) In this section, "intimate parts," "sexual conduct," and "visual 
material" have the meanings assigned by Section 21.16. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly transmits by 
electronic means visual material that: 
(1) depicts: 
(A) any person engaging in sexual conduct or with the person's intimate parts 
exposed; or 
(B) covered genitals of a male person that are in a discernibly turgid state; 
and 
(2) is not sent at the request of or with the express consent of the recipient. 
(c) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(d) If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under any other law, the actor may be prosecuted under this 
section or the other law. 
43.261. ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF CERTAIN VISUAL 
MATERIAL DEPICTING MINOR (a)
 (2) "Minor" means a person younger than 18 years of age.
 (3) "Produce" with respect to visual material includes any conduct that directly contributes to the 
creation or manufacture of the material.
 (b-1) For conduct prohibited in offense (b), visual material includes a depiction of a minor:
 (1) who is recognizable as an actual person by face, likeness, or other distinguishing characteristics, & 
(2) whose image, when under 18, was used in creating, adapting, or modifying it, including computer
generated/artificial intelligence like apps/software
 43.261. ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF CERTAIN 
VISUAL MATERIAL DEPICTING MINOR
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 g) Stackable
 (b) who is a minor intentionally or knowingly:
 (1) by electronic means promotes to a minor visual material 
depicting a minor, including the actor, engaging in sexual 
conduct, if actor produced/knows another minor did; or
 (2) possesses an electronic visual material depicting another 
minor engaging in sexual conduct, if the actor produced it or 
knows another minor did.
 Class C except
 c) Class B for b)1) if w/ intent to harass, annoy, alarm, abuse, 
torment, embarrass, or offend; or any conviction under here
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 d) Class B for (b)(2) with any conviction here
 c) Class A: if trial of (b)(1) shows 1 or more B 
convictions here or 2 or more of any here
 d) Class A if 2 or more of any convictions here
 (h)  Except for FC 51.13, a finding that one has engaged in 
conduct here; it will be considered a conviction HERE
 e) Affirmative defense if the visual material:
 (1) depicted only the actor or another minor: who 
was not more than two years older/younger AND 
had a dating relationship at the time; or a spouse.
 AND (2) was promoted or received only to or 
from the actor and the other minor.
 (f) Defense for (b)(2) that the actor:
 (1) did not produce or solicit the visual material;
 (2) possessed only after receiving it from a minor; 
AND (3) destroyed the material in a reasonable 
amount of time after receiving it from a minor.
 (2)  "Minor" means a person younger than 18 years of age. 
(3)  "Produce" with respect to visual material includes any conduct that 
directly contributes to the creation or manufacture of the material. 
(b-1) For conduct prohibited in offense (b), visual material includes a 
depiction of a minor: 
(1) who is recognizable as an actual person by face, likeness, or other 
distinguishing characteristics, &  
(2) whose image, when under 18, was used in creating, adapting, or 
modifying it, including computer-generated/artificial intelligence like 
apps/software 
(b) A person who is a minor commits an offense if the person intentionally or 
knowingly: 
(1) by electronic means promotes to another minor visual material depicting a 
minor, including the actor, engaging in sexual conduct, if the actor produced 
the visual material or knows that another minor produced the visual material; 
or 
(2) possesses in an electronic format visual material depicting another minor 
engaging in sexual conduct, if the actor produced the visual material or knows 
that another minor produced the visual material. 
(b-1) For purposes of conduct prohibited under Subsection (b), visual material 
to which that conduct applies includes a depiction of a minor: 
(1) who is recognizable as an actual person by the person's face, likeness, or 
other distinguishing characteristic, such as a unique birthmark or other 
recognizable feature; and 
(2) whose image as a minor was used in creating, adapting, or modifying the 
visual material, including computer-generated visual material that was 
created, adapted, or modified using an artificial intelligence application or 
other computer software. 
(c) An offense under Subsection (b)(1) is a Class C misdemeanor, except that 
the offense is: 
(1) a Class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the 
actor: 
(A) promoted the visual material with intent to harass, annoy, alarm, abuse, 
torment, embarrass, or offend another; or 
(B) except as provided by Subdivision (2)(A), has previously been convicted 
one time of any offense under this section; or 
(2) a Class A misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the 
actor has previously been: 
(A) convicted one or more times of an offense punishable under Subdivision 
(1)(A); or 
(B) convicted two or more times of any offense under this section. 
(d) An offense under Subsection (b)(2) is a Class C misdemeanor, except that 
the offense is: 
(1) a Class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the 
actor has previously been convicted one time of any offense under this 
section; or 
Sexual Electronic “Sharing” Chart
 Offenses
 43.261 ELECTRONIC 
TRANSMISSION OF 
CERTAIN VISUAL 
MATERIAL 
DEPICTING MINOR.
 21.15.  INVASIVE 
VISUAL 
RECORDING
 21.16.  UNLAWFUL 
DISCLOSURE OR 
PROMOTION OF 
INTIMATE VISUAL 
MATERIAL
 21.19. UNLAWFUL 
ELECTRONIC 
TRANSMISSION OF 
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT 
VISUAL MATERIAL. 
Elements
 A MINOR who promotes elec. visual material to a minor or un
willingly possesses visuals of another engaged sexual conduct, 
unless shared among the depicted minors who are within 2 years 
of age
 records, broadcasts, or transmits a (reasonably) private image of 
another’s intimate area w/o consent & intent to invade privacy
 Offense levels- Class C - Class B to harass, annoy, 
alarm, abuse, torment, 
embarrass, or offend- Class B or A for priors
 1. Un-consensual disclosure of a private & non-public, or a 2nd hand 
obtained visual material of another’s intimate parts or sexual conduct 
that ID’s the victim somehow, and causes harm
 2. Promotes the above visual material on the Internet or other forum
 3. Threatens to disclose any intimate or sexual visual material for benefit
 Knowingly electronically transmits visual material of anyone in sexual 
conduct or with their intimate parts exposed; or covered male genitals in a 
turgid state; and not sent at the request of/consent of the recipient.
 State jail
 State jail
 Class C
 43.21. OBSCENITY DEFINITIONS (a)
 (1)  Obscene = material/performance that: (A) average person, applying contemporary community 
standards, would find that taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex;
 (B) Depicts or describes: 
(i) patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or 
simulated, including sexual intercourse, sodomy, and sexual bestiality;  or
 (ii) patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, sadism, 
masochism, lewd genital exhibition, M/F genitals in a state of sexual stimulation/arousal, covered male 
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or a device designed & marketed primarily for stimulation of the 
human genital organs;  and
 (C) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value.
 (2) a Class A misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the 
actor has previously been convicted two or more times of any offense under 
this section. 
(e) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the 
visual material: 
(1) depicted only the actor or another minor: 
(A) who is not more than two years older or younger than the actor and with 
whom the actor had a dating relationship at the time of the offense; or 
(B) who was the spouse of the actor at the time of the offense; and 
(2) was promoted or received only to or from the actor and the other minor. 
(f) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) that the actor: 
(1) did not produce or solicit the visual material; 
(2) possessed the visual material only after receiving the material from 
another minor; and 
(3) destroyed the visual material within a reasonable amount of time after 
receiving the material from another minor. 
(g) If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes 
an offense under another law, the defendant may be prosecuted under this 
section, the other law, or both. 
(h) Notwithstanding Section 51.13, Family Code, a finding that a person has 
engaged in conduct in violation of this section is considered a conviction for 
the purposes of Subsections (c) and (d). 
Obscene = material/performance that: (A) average person, applying 
contemporary community standards, would find that taken as a whole 
appeals to the prurient interest in sex; 
 Depicts or describes:  
(i) patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, 
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse, 
sodomy, and sexual bestiality;  or 
(ii) patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, 
excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd genital exhibition, M/F 
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation/arousal, covered male genitals in a 
discernibly turgid state, or a device designed & marketed primarily for 
stimulation of the human genital organs;  and 
(C) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific 
value. 
43.21. OBSCENITY DEFINITIONS (a)
 (2) Material = anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to arouse interest, thru 
reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner (Does not include 3D obscene device.)
 (4) Patently offensive = so offensive on its face as to affront current community decency  standards 
(5) Promote = manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, 
distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or offer/agree to do same
 (6) Wholesale promote = Promote for purpose of resale.
 (7) Obscene device = device including a dildo or artificial vagina, designed or marketed as useful 
primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.
 (b) If any of the depictions/descriptions of sexual conduct in this section are court declared to be 
unlawful, it shall not invalidate this section for other offensive sexual conduct included herein.
 (2) "Material" means anything tangible that is capable of being used or 
adapted to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, 
observation, sound, or in any other manner, but does not include an actual 
three dimensional obscene device. 
(3) "Performance" means a play, motion picture, dance, or other exhibition 
performed before an audience. 
(4) "Patently offensive" means so offensive on its face as to affront current 
community standards of decency. 
(5) "Promote" means to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, 
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, 
exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
(6) "Wholesale promote" means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, 
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to 
offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale. 
(7) "Obscene device" means a device including a dildo or artificial vagina, 
designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital 
organs. 
43.22. OBSCENE DISPLAY OR DISTRIBUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) intentionally or knowingly displays or distributes an 
obscene photo, drawing, or similar visual representation or 
other obscene material and 
is reckless about whether a person is present who will be 
offended or alarmed by the display or distribution.
 Defense Arguments & 
Punishments
 Class C 
43.24. SALE, DISTRIBUTION, OR DISPLAY OF 
HARMFUL MATERIAL TO MINOR
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) knowing that the material is harmful:
 (1) Knowing the person is a minor: sells, distributes, exhibits, 
or possesses for sale, distribution, or exhibition to a minor;
 (2) Displays harmful material and is reckless about whether a 
minor is present who will be offended/alarmed;  or
 (3) Hires, employs, or uses a minor to do or accomplish/assist 
any of the acts prohibited in Subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2).
 Defense Arguments & 
Punishments
 (c) Affirmative defense: the sale, distribution, or 
exhibition was by a person having scientific, 
educational, governmental, or other similar 
justification.
 d) Class A for (b) (1-2)
 (c-1) Defense: actor was the spouse of the minor
 d) 3rd degree
 (a)(1) Minor = younger than 18 years.
 (2) Harmful material = dominant theme taken as a whole:
 (A) appeals to a minor’s prurient interest in sex, nudity, or excretion;
 (B) is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult 
community as to what is suitable for minors;  and
 (C) is utterly without redeeming social value for minors.
 (b) If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this 
section are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully 
included herein, this declaration shall not invalidate this section as to other 
patently offensive sexual conduct included herein. 
43.22. OBSCENE DISPLAY OR DISTRIBUTION. (a) A person commits an offense 
if he intentionally or knowingly displays or distributes an obscene 
photograph, drawing, or similar visual representation or other obscene 
material and is reckless about whether a person is present who will be 
offended or alarmed by the display or distribution. 
(b) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
43.24. SALE, DISTRIBUTION, OR DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATERIAL TO MINOR. 
(a) For purposes of this section: 
(1) "Minor" means an individual younger than 18 years. 
(2) "Harmful material" means material whose dominant theme taken as a 
whole: 
(A) appeals to the prurient interest of a minor, in sex, nudity, or excretion; 
(B) is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a 
whole with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 
(C) is utterly without redeeming social value for minors. 
(b) A person commits an offense if, knowing that the material is harmful: 
(1) and knowing the person is a minor, he sells, distributes, exhibits, or 
possesses for sale, distribution, or exhibition to a minor harmful material; 
(2) he displays harmful material and is reckless about whether a minor is 
present who will be offended or alarmed by the display; or 
(3) he hires, employs, or uses a minor to do or accomplish or assist in doing or 
accomplishing any of the acts prohibited in Subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2). 
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the sale, 
distribution, or exhibition was by a person having scientific, educational, 
governmental, or other similar justification. 
(c-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor was the 
spouse of the minor at the time of the offense. 
(d) An offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor unless it is 
committed under Subsection (b)(3) in which event it is a felony of the third 
degree. 
43.26.  POSSESSION OR PROMOTION 
OF CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 a)(1) knowingly/intentionally possesses/accesses with intent 
to view, visual material that depicts a child under 18 engaging 
in sexual conduct, also a child under 20A.02(a)(5-8); and  
(2) person knows the material depicts a child under (1); or
 e)(1) knowingly/intentionally promotes or possesses with 
intent to promote material in (a)(1);  and
 (2) person knows the material depicts a child described by (1)
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) Affirmative defenses in 43.25(f)(2) & (3) apply:
 (2) bona fide educational, medical, psychological, 
psychiatric, judicial, LE, or legislative purpose; or
 (3) Not more than two years older than the child. 
(i) Visual material includes a depiction of a child:
 (1) who is recognizable as an actual person by a face, likeness, or 
other distinguishing characteristics (birth marks), & 
(2) whose image, when under 18, was used in creating, adapting, or 
modifying it, including computer-generated/artificial intelligence 
like apps/software
 (h) Defense if a LE officer/school admin. who:
 (1) possessed/accessed the material in good faith 
solely due to a 43.261 allegation; 
(2) allowed other LE/school admin. to possess/ 
access the material only as appropriate for (1); and
 (3) took reasonable steps to destroy the material 
within an appropriate period following (1) 
43.26. POSSESSION OR PROMOTION OF CHILD PORNOGRAPHY. (a) A person 
commits an offense if: 
(1) the person knowingly or intentionally possesses, or knowingly or 
intentionally accesses with intent to view, visual material that visually depicts 
a child younger than 18 years of age at the time the image of the child was 
made who is engaging in sexual conduct, including a child who engages in 
sexual conduct as a victim of an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(5), (6), (7), 
or (8); and 
(2) the person knows that the material depicts the child as described by 
Subdivision (1). 
(b) In this section: 
(1) "Promote" has the meaning assigned by Section 43.25. 
(2) "Sexual conduct" has the meaning assigned by Section 43.25. 
(3) "Visual material" means: 
(A) any film, photograph, videotape, negative, or slide or any photographic 
reproduction that contains or incorporates in any manner any film, 
photograph, videotape, negative, or slide; or 
(B) any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be 
displayed on a computer or other video screen and any image transmitted to 
a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable, satellite 
transmission, or other method. 
(c) The affirmative defenses provided by Sections 43.25(f)(2) and (3) also 
apply to a prosecution under this section. 
(e) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) the person knowingly or intentionally promotes or possesses with intent 
to promote material described by Subsection (a)(1); and 
(2) the person knows that the material depicts the child as described by 
Subsection (a)(1). 
(h) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) or (e) that the actor is a 
law enforcement officer or a school administrator who: 
(1) possessed or accessed the visual material in good faith solely as a result of 
an allegation of a violation of Section 43.261; 
(2) allowed other law enforcement or school administrative personnel to 
possess or access the material only as appropriate based on the allegation 
described by Subdivision (1); and 
(3) took reasonable steps to destroy the material within an appropriate 
period following the allegation described by Subdivision (1). 
(i) For purposes of conduct prohibited under this section, visual material to 
which that conduct applies includes a depiction of a child: 
(1) who is recognizable as an actual person by the person's face, likeness, or 
other distinguishing characteristic, such as a unique birthmark or other 
recognizable feature; and 
(2) whose image as a child younger than 18 years of age was used in creating, 
adapting, or modifying the visual material, including computer-generated 
visual material that was created, adapted, or modified using an artificial 
intelligence application or other computer software. 
(g) An offense under Subsection (e) is a felony of the second degree, except 
that the offense is a felony of the first degree if it is shown on the trial of the 
43.26.  POSSESSION OR PROMOTION 
OF CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 a) Punishments & Enhancements
 d)1) 3rd Degree: < 100 a)1) depictions
 a)(1) knowingly/intentionally 
possesses/accesses with intent to view, 
visual material that depicts a child 
under 18 engaging in sexual conduct, 
also a child under 20A.02(a)(5-8); and
 (2) person knows the material depicts 
a child under (1); 
1st Degree: 
d)1) 2nd Degree with a previous conviction or >100<500 depictions
 d) 2 or more convictions/video/film of 22.011a2) offense
 3) 500 or more depictions
 4) life/25 to 99 if trials shows the actor was:
 (A-C) employee at child-care/residential treatment facility/state funded 
youth shelter/facility or (D) state funds for the care of a depicted child
 d-1) If the (a) trial shows conduct that constituted an (e) offense in the 
same criminal episode, a 2nd becomes a1st or min term is 15 years
 * If the depicted is under 10 for (a) or there is a previous conviction, 
the  punishment is +1 or minimum term is 15 years for a 1st deg
 (d-2) d-1) unavailable for (e) prosecutions of the same criminal episode
 offense that the person has been previously convicted of an offense under 
that subsection. 
(d) An offense under Subsection (a) is a felony of the third degree, except that 
the offense is: 
(1) a felony of the second degree if: 
(A) it is shown on the trial of the offense that the person has been previously 
convicted one time of an offense under that subsection; or 
(B) the person possesses visual material that contains 10 or more visual 
depictions of a child as described by Subsection (a)(1) but fewer than 50 such 
depictions; and 
(2) a felony of the first degree if: 
(A) it is shown on the trial of the offense that the person has been previously 
convicted two or more times of an offense under that subsection; or 
(B) the person possesses visual material that contains: 
(i) 50 or more visual depictions of a child as described by Subsection (a)(1); or 
(ii) a videotape or film that visually depicts conduct constituting an offense 
under Section 22.011(a)(2). 
(d) An offense under Subsection (a) is: 
(1) a felony of the third degree if the person possesses visual material that 
contains fewer than 100 visual depictions of a child as described by 
Subsection (a)(1); 
(2) a felony of the second degree if the person possesses visual material that 
contains 100 or more visual depictions of a child as described by Subsection 
(a)(1) but fewer than 500 such depictions; 
(3) a felony of the first degree if the person possesses visual material that 
contains 500 or more visual depictions of a child as described by Subsection 
(a)(1); or 
(4) a felony of the first degree punishable by imprisonment in the Texas 
Department of Criminal Justice for life or for any term of not more than 99 
years or less than 25 years if it is shown on the trial of the offense that, at the 
t
 ime of the offense, the person was: 
(A) an employee at a child-care facility or a residential child-care facility, as 
those terms are defined by Section 42.002, Human Resources Code; 
(B) an employee at a residential treatment facility established under Section 
221.056, Human Resources Code; 
(C) an employee at a shelter or facility that serves youth and that receives 
state funds; or 
(D) receiving state funds for the care of a child depicted by the visual 
material. 
(d-1) If it is shown on the trial of an offense under Subsection (a) that the 
person engaged in conduct that constituted an offense under Subsection (e) 
during the same criminal episode: 
(1) an offense described for purposes of punishment by Subsection (d)(1) is a 
felony of the first degree; or 
(2) the minimum term of confinement for an offense described for purposes 
of punishment by Subsection (d)(2) is increased to 15 years. 
(d-1) If it is shown on the trial of an offense under Subsection (a) that the 
visual material depicted a child younger than 10 years of age at the time the 
image of the child was made or that the defendant has been previously 
convicted of an offense under that subsection: 
43.262.  POSSESSION OR PROMOTION OF LEWD 
VISUAL MATERIAL DEPICTING CHILD 
Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b)knowingly possesses, accesses with intent to view, or 
promotes visual material that:
 (1) depicts the lewd exhibition of the genitals or pubic area of 
an unclothed, partially clothed, or clothed child under 18;
 (2) appeals to the prurient interest in sex; and
 (3) has no serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
 (b-1) For (b) to apply it must include a depiction of a child:
 (1) who is recognizable as an actual person by their face, 
likeness, or other distinguishing characteristic/feature; and
 (2) whose child image was used in creating, adapting, or 
modifying the visual material, including computer-generated, 
AI, or other software.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (d) It is not a defense to prosecution under this 
section that the depicted child consented to the 
creation of the visual material. 
SJF unless 
3°F if trial shows 1 prior 43.26 conviction
 2nd Degree if trial shows two or more  
prior conviction under 43.26
 (1) an offense described for purposes of punishment by Subsection (d)(1) or 
(2) is increased to the next higher category of offense; or 
(2) the minimum term of confinement for an offense described for purposes 
of punishment by Subsection (d)(3) is increased to 15 years. 
(d-2) The enhancement provided by Subsection (d-1) is unavailable if the 
person is also prosecuted under Subsection (e) for conduct occurring during 
the same criminal episode. 
Sec. 43.262. POSSESSION OR PROMOTION OF LEWD VISUAL MATERIAL 
DEPICTING CHILD. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Promote" and "sexual conduct" have the meanings assigned by Section 
43.25. 
(2) "Visual material" has the meaning assigned by Section 43.26. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly possesses, accesses 
with intent to view, or promotes visual material that: 
(1) depicts the lewd exhibition of the genitals or pubic area of an unclothed, 
partially clothed, or clothed child who is younger than 18 years of age at the 
t
 ime the visual material was created; 
(2) appeals to the prurient interest in sex; and 
(3) has no serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(b-1) For purposes of conduct prohibited under Subsection (b), visual material 
to which that conduct applies includes a depiction of a child: 
(1) who is recognizable as an actual person by the person's face, likeness, or 
other distinguishing characteristic, such as a unique birthmark or other 
recognizable feature; and 
(2) whose image as a child younger than 18 years of age was used in creating, 
adapting, or modifying the visual material, including computer-generated 
visual material that was created, adapted, or modified using an artificial 
intelligence application or other computer software. 
(c) An offense under this section is a state jail felony, except that the offense 
is: 
(1) a felony of the third degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that 
the person has been previously convicted one time of an offense under this 
section or Section 43.26; and 
(2) a felony of the second degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that 
the person has been previously convicted two or more times of an offense 
under this section or Section 43.26. 
(d) It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the depicted child 
consented to the creation of the visual material.  
Child Pornography Chart
 Offenses
 43.22 OBSCENE DISPLAY OR 
DISTRIBUTION. 
43.24. SALE, DISTRIBUTION, 
OR DISPLAY OF HARMFUL 
MATERIAL TO MINOR. 
43.26.  POSSESSION OR 
PROMOTION OF CHILD 
PORNOGRAPHY
 Elements
 Reckless display of something 
obscene that offends or alarms 
someone
 Providing to or involving a minor in 
offensive, inappropriate material 
about sex, nudity, or excretion
 Offense levels
 43.262.  POSSESSION OR 
PROMOTION OF LEWD 
VISUAL MATERIAL 
DEPICTING CHILD
 Class C misdemeanor.
 Class A to 3rd degree
 Possesses or views child porn or 
promotes it; 6 or more items is 
presumed as intent to promote
 possesses, views, or promotes lewd 
visual material of a child’s  genitals 
or pubic area (clothed or not)
 43.23.  OBSCENITY. 
3rd degree with enhancements 
to 1st degree for priors
 Promotion starts at 2nd degree 
with enhancement for priors
 state jail but 3rd for a prior 
43.26 or 2nd for 2 or more 
43.26 priors
 Not on state test
 (a)  A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he wholesale promotes or possesses 
with intent to wholesale promote any obscene material or obscene device.
 (c)  A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he:
 (1)  promotes or possesses with intent to promote any obscene material or obscene device;  or
 (2)  produces, presents, or directs an obscene performance or participates in a portion thereof that is obscene or 
that contributes to its obscenity.
 (b & d) Except as provided by Subsection (h), an offense under Subsection (a & c) is a state jail felony.
 (h) Punishment is a second degree if the trial shows the obscene material depicts obscene (1)(B) activities by  
a child (under 18) or any image/adapted one of an identifiable child (recognizable as an actual person)
 43.23 Obscenity Presumptions and Defenses
 (e)  A person who promotes/wholesale promotes obscene material/device or possesses with intent to in the 
course of his business is presumed to do so with knowledge of its content and character.
 (f)  A person who possesses six or more obscene devices or identical/similar obscene articles is presumed to 
possess them with intent to promote the same.
 (g)  Affirmative defense if the person who possesses/promotes material/devices under this section does so 
for a bona fide medical, psychiatric, judicial, legislative, or law enforcement purpose.
 Understand Offenses Against Public Order and 
Decency (Title 9)
 Not on 
state test
 Sec. 43.27.  DUTY TO REPORT.  
(a)  For purposes of this section, " visual material" has the meaning assigned by 
Section 43.26.
 (b)  A business that develops or processes visual material and determines that the 
material may be evidence of a criminal offense under this subchapter shall report 
the existence of the visual material to a local law enforcement agency.
 Info purposes only- ***Not on State Test 
(d) Except as provided by Subsection (h), an offense under Subsection (c) is a 
Class A misdemeanor. 
(e) A person who promotes or wholesale promotes obscene material or an 
obscene device or possesses the same with intent to promote or wholesale 
promote it in the course of his business is presumed to do so with knowledge 
of its content and character. 
(f) A person who possesses six or more obscene devices or identical or similar 
obscene articles is presumed to possess them with intent to promote the 
same. 
(g) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the 
person who possesses or promotes material or a device proscribed by this 
section does so for a bona fide medical, psychiatric, judicial, legislative, or law 
enforcement purpose. 
Info purposes only- ***Not on State Test 
Sec. 43.02. PROSTITUTION. 
43.02. PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) knowingly offers or agrees to receive a fee from another to 
engage in sexual conduct.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (d) Defense under (a) that the actor engaged in the 
conduct because the actor was the victim of 
conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 
20A.02 or 43.05.
 Class B 
Class A w/1 or 2 prev convictions
 SJF w/ 3 or more convictions
 (e) A conviction may be used for enhancement 
under this section or enhancement under 
Subchapter D, Chapter 12, but not under both. 
43.021. SOLICITATION OF PROSTITUTION.
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) knowingly offers or agrees to pay a fee to another person 
for the purpose of engaging in sexual conduct with that 
person or another.
 SJF 
3°F w/prior conviction 
2°F if solicits child u18
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (b-1) The punishment under (a) is increased to the 
next highest category of offense if it is shown on 
the trial of the offense that the actor committed the 
offense in a location that was: within 1,000 feet of 
the premises of a school or where an official school 
function was taking place; or an event sponsored or 
sanctioned by the University Interscholastic League 
was taking place.
 (c) A conviction may be used for enhancement 
under this section or enhancement under 
Subchapter D, Chapter 12, but not under both. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly offers or agrees to 
receive a fee from another to engage in sexual conduct. 
(b-1) Repealed by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 685 (H.B. 29), Sec. 44(2), eff. 
September 1, 2017. 
(c) An offense under Subsection (a) is a Class B misdemeanor, except that the 
offense is: 
(1) a Class A misdemeanor if the actor has previously been convicted one or 
two times of an offense under Subsection (a); or 
(2) a state jail felony if the actor has previously been convicted three or more 
t
 imes of an offense under Subsection (a). 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) that the 
actor engaged in the conduct that constitutes the offense because the actor 
was the victim of conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02 or 
43.05. 
(e) A conviction may be used for purposes of enhancement under this section 
or enhancement under Subchapter D, Chapter 12, but not under both this 
section and Subchapter D, Chapter 12. For purposes of enhancement of 
penalties under this section or Subchapter D, Chapter 12, a defendant is 
previously convicted of an offense under this section if the defendant was 
adjudged guilty of the offense or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere 
in return for a grant of deferred adjudication, regardless of whether the 
sentence for the offense was ever imposed or whether the sentence was 
probated and the defendant was subsequently discharged from community 
supervision. 
Sec. 43.021. SOLICITATION OF PROSTITUTION. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly offers or agrees to 
pay a fee to another person for the purpose of engaging in sexual conduct 
with that person or another. 
(b) An offense under Subsection (a) is a state jail felony, except that the 
offense is: 
(1) a felony of the third degree if the actor has previously been convicted of 
an offense under Subsection (a) or under Section 43.02(b), as that law existed 
before September 1, 2021; or 
(2) a felony of the second degree if the person to whom the actor offers or 
agrees to pay the fee for the purpose of engaging in sexual conduct is: 
(A) younger than 18 years of age, regardless of whether the actor knows the 
age of the person at the time of the offense; 
(B) represented to the actor as being younger than 18 years of age; or 
(C) believed by the actor to be younger than 18 years of age. 
(b-1) The punishment prescribed for an offense under Subsection (a) is 
increased to the punishment prescribed for the next highest category of 
offense if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the actor committed the 
offense in a location that was: 
(1) on the premises of or within 1,000 feet of the premises of a school; or 
(2) on premises or within 1,000 feet of premises where: 
(A) an official school function was taking place; or(B) an event sponsored or 
sanctioned by the University Interscholastic League was taking place. 
(c) A conviction may be used for purposes of enhancement under this section 
or enhancement under Subchapter D, Chapter 12, but not under both this 
section and that subchapter. For purposes of enhancement of penalties under 
this section or Subchapter D, Chapter 12, a defendant is considered to have 
been previously convicted of an offense under this section or under Section 
43.02(b), as that law existed before September 1, 2021, if the defendant was 
adjudged guilty of the offense or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere 
in return for a grant of deferred adjudication, regardless of whether the 
sentence for the offense was ever imposed or whether the sentence was 
probated and the defendant was subsequently discharged from community 
supervision. 
43.03. PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) acting other than as a prostitute receiving compensation for 
personally rendered prostitution services, he or she knowingly:
 (1) receives money or other property pursuant to an agreement to 
participate in the proceeds of prostitution; or
 (2) solicits another to engage in sexual conduct with another person 
for compensation.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 3°F
 2°F w/prior conviction 
1°F if person u18
 43.04.  AGGRAVATED PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) knowingly owns, invests in, finances, controls, supervises, 
or manages a prostitution enterprise that uses two or more
 prostitutes
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 1°F
 Prostitutes other than yourself
 43.031. ONLINE PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) owns, manages, or operates an interactive computer service
 or info content provider, or operates as an info content 
provider, with the intent to promote the prostitution of 
another or facilitate another to engage in/solicit prostitution
 (1-c) Info content provider: any person/entity that is wholly/partly 
responsible for the creation/development of info provided through 
the Internet or any other interactive computer service.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 3°F
 2°F w/prior conviction or
 prostitute is < 18 regardless of 
defendant knowing age
 (1-d) Interactive computer service: any info service, system, or access 
software provider that provides/enables computer access to a 
computer server by multiple users, including a service or system that 
provides access to the internet or a system operated or service offered 
by a library or educational institution.
 Website/App owner/creator/manager
 Sec. 43.03. PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION.  
(a) A person commits an offense if, acting other than as a prostitute receiving 
compensation for personally rendered prostitution services, he or she 
knowingly: 
(1) receives money or other property pursuant to an agreement to participate 
in the proceeds of prostitution; or 
(2) solicits another to engage in sexual conduct with another person for 
compensation. 
(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the third degree, except that 
the offense is: 
(1) a felony of the second degree if the actor has been previously convicted of 
an offense under this section; or 
(2) a felony of the first degree if the actor engages in conduct described by 
Subsection (a)(1) or (2) involving a person younger than 18 years of age, 
regardless of whether the actor knows the age of the person at the time of 
the offense. 
Sec. 43.04.  AGGRAVATED PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION.   
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly owns, invests in, finances, 
controls, supervises, or manages a prostitution enterprise that uses two or 
more prostitutes. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree. 
Sec. 43.031. ONLINE PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person owns, manages, or operates an 
interactive computer service or information content provider, or operates as 
an information content provider, with the intent to promote the prostitution 
of another person or facilitate another person to engage in prostitution or 
solicitation of prostitution. 
(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the third degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the second degree if the actor: 
(1) has been previously convicted of an offense under this section or Section 
43.041; or 
43.041. AGGRAVATED ONLINE 
PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) owns, manages, or operates an interactive computer service 
or information content provider, or operates as an 
information content provider, with the intent to promote the 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 2°F
 prostitution of five or more or 
facilitate five or more in prostitution OR solicitation
 1°F w/prev conviction or 2 or more 
persons under 18
 43.05. COMPELLING PROSTITUTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Stackable
 (a) knowingly:
 (1) causes another by force, threat, coercion, or fraud to 
commit prostitution;
 (2) causes by any means a child younger than 18 years to 
commit prostitution, regardless of whether the actor knows 
the age of the child at the time of the offense; or
 (3) causes by any means a disabled individual to commit 
prostitution, regardless of whether the actor knows the 
individual is disabled at the time of the offense.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 d) Coercion (1.07) includes: (1) threatening to/ 
destroying, concealing, confiscating, or withholding 
a person’s actual or purported: government records; 
or identifying info or documents;
 (2) causing a person, without consent, to become 
intoxicated, to a degree that impairs their ability to 
appraise the nature of their conduct, constituting 
prostitution or to resist engaging in the conduct; or
 1°F
 (3) withholding alcohol/controlled substance so 
that it impairs the ability of a chemically dependent 
person to appraise the nature of their prostitution 
conduct or to resist engaging in the conduct.
 (2) engages in conduct described by Subsection (a) involving a person younger 
than 18 years of age engaging in prostitution, regardless of whether the actor 
knows the age of the person at the time of the offense. 
Sec. 43.041. AGGRAVATED ONLINE PROMOTION OF PROSTITUTION. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person owns, manages, or operates an 
interactive computer service or information content provider, or operates as 
an information content provider, with the intent to promote the prostitution 
of five or more persons or facilitate five or more persons to engage in 
prostitution or solicitation of prostitution. 
(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that 
the offense is a felony of the first degree if the actor: 
(1) has been previously convicted of an offense under this section; or 
(2) engages in conduct described by Subsection (a) involving two or more 
persons younger than 18 years of age engaging in prostitution, regardless of 
whether the actor knows the age of the persons at the time of the offense. 
Sec. 43.05. COMPELLING PROSTITUTION.  
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly: 
(1) causes another by force, threat, coercion, or fraud to commit prostitution; 
(2) causes by any means a child younger than 18 years to commit prostitution, 
regardless of whether the actor knows the age of the child at the time of the 
offense; or 
(3) causes by any means a disabled individual, as defined by Section 
22.021(b), to commit prostitution, regardless of whether the actor knows the 
individual is disabled at the time of the offense. 
(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree. 
(c) If conduct constituting an offense under this section also constitutes an 
offense under another section of this code, the actor may be prosecuted 
under either section or under both sections. 
(d) For purposes of this section, "coercion" as defined by Section 1.07 
includes: 
(1) destroying, concealing, confiscating, or withholding from a person, or 
threatening to destroy, conceal, confiscate, or withhold from a person, the 
person's actual or purported: 
(A) government records; or 
(B) identifying information or documents; 
(2) causing a person, without the person's consent, to become intoxicated, as 
defined by Section 49.01, to a degree that impairs the person's ability to 
appraise the nature of the person's conduct that constitutes prostitution or to 
resist engaging in that conduct; or 
(3) withholding alcohol or a controlled substance to a degree that impairs the 
ability of a person with a chemical dependency, as defined by Section 
462.001, Health and Safety Code, to appraise the nature of the person's 
conduct that constitutes prostitution or to resist engaging in that conduct. 
21.18.  SEXUAL COERCION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) intentionally threatens, including coercion or extortion, to 
commit a Ch 43 or 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8), 21.02, 21.08, 
21.11, 21.12, 21.15, 21.16, 21.17, 22.011, or 22.021 offense to
 obtain, in return for not committing the threatened offense, 
any of the following benefits: 
(1) intimate visual material;
 (2) act of sexual conduct causing arousal/gratification; or
 (3) a monetary benefit or other benefit of value. OR
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 e) SJF except
 d) 3rd degree if the trial shows a previous 
conviction for this section
 (d) This applies to a threat regardless of how it is 
communicated, including via e-mail or an Internet 
website, social media account, chat room, or other 
electronic or technological means.
 (c) intentionally threatens, including coercion/extortion, to 
commit a Ch 19/20/20A.02(a)(1-2) / (5-6) offense to obtain, 
in return for not committing it, either of these: (1) intimate 
visual material/(2) sexual conduct for arousal/gratification
 21.18 Sexual Coercion Definition Mistake
 • **** It should be noted that the definition for "intimate Visual Material" is located in Sec 
21.16(b)(1) or ( c ) HOWEVER, this citation is INCORRECT. ****
 • The definition is found in Sec 21.16(a)(5)
 • This unintentional oversight could be problematic moving forward and local prosecutors are 
tasked with carefully reviewing the elements of an offense under this section.
 21.18. SEXUAL COERCION. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Intimate visual material" means the visual material described by Section 
21.16(b)(1) or (c). 
(2) "Sexual conduct" has the meaning assigned by Section 43.25. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally threatens, 
including by coercion or extortion, to commit an offense under Chapter 43 or 
Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8), 21.02, 21.08, 21.11, 21.12, 21.15, 21.16, 
21.17, 22.011, or 22.021 to obtain, in return for not committing the 
threatened offense or in connection with the threatened offense, any of the 
following benefits: 
(1) intimate visual material; 
(2) an act involving sexual conduct causing arousal or gratification; or 
(3) a monetary benefit or other benefit of value. 
(c) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally threatens, 
including by coercion or extortion, to commit an offense under Chapter 19 or 
20 or Section 20A.02(a)(1), (2), (5), or (6) to obtain, in return for not 
committing the threatened offense or in connection with the threatened 
offense, either of the following benefits: 
(1) intimate visual material; or 
(2) an act involving sexual conduct causing arousal or gratification. 
(d) This section applies to a threat regardless of how that threat is 
communicated, including a threat transmitted through e-mail or an Internet 
website, social media account, or chat room and a threat made by other 
electronic or technological means. 
(e) An offense under this section is a state jail felony, except that the offense 
is a felony of the third degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the 
defendant has previously been convicted of an offense under this section. 
•**** It should be noted that the definition for "intimate Visual Material" is 
located in Sec 21.16(b)(1) or ( c ) HOWEVER, this citation is INCORRECT. **** 
•The definition is found in Sec 21.16(a)(5) 
•This unintentional oversight could be problematic moving forward and local 
prosecutors are tasked with carefully reviewing the elements of an offense 
under this section. 
Escalating Offenses 
Read the scenario up to the next number, then stop and select the best highest 
offense, if any apply, that you have up to that point.  Then, keeping in mind what you 
just read, continue to the next number and do the same.  Use the letter choices on 
slide above for your selections.  
Access the scenario via handout or the self poling software 
Conclusion 
Questions
 • Q/A session? 
• Review Game/Quiz? 